6 The Circuit of Detachment and the Political Bond The components of the circuit that we have described –excessiveness, disen- chantment, irritation, and detachment –must be seen as acting synchronically. This synchronicity is key to understanding Chilean society today. A set of phenomena that we think of as contradictory or simply illegible are, strictly speaking, the result of the plurality of currents in action. This simultaneity also contributes to the high levels of uncertainty in which social life must develop today. The circuit of detachment weakens individuals ’adherence to society and drastically changes their relationship with the principles of action and ideals that used to order social relations and interactions. A ﬁssion occurs when one ’s relationship with society, its institutions, and individuals is based on mistrust, on the need to take a protective step back, or, even more worryingly, on radical rejection. Whether an engaged citizenry is a condition for societal stability remains an open question, but the social and political bonds seem to be on shaky grounds. 6.1 Detachment and the Political Bond Detachment cannot be treated as equivalent to political disaffection. Detachment does not entail a de ﬁnitive withdrawal from politics, but it does indicate that individuals ’relationships with politics have become much less ideologically or organizationally coherent. In the case of Chile, although the neoliberal project was initially quite successful in promoting popular political demobilization ( Kurtz 2004 ), it para- doxically led over time to an increase of popular political mobilization ( Arce and Bellinger 2007 ). In particular, neoliberalism displaced the traditional forms in which political mobilization had been organized with a more diverse spec- trum of actors and political tactics ( Roberts 2008 ). All of this happened along- side a serious erosion of institutional politics ( Luna 2017 ;Bargsted and Somma 2018 ) in a country characterized by what Albertus and Menaldo (2018) have called an elite-biased democracy. This explains, for example, why there is no contradiction between the expanding process of detachment and the social uprising of 2019. In fact, the circuit of detachment reveals how the processes that frame this moment of Chilean history contributed to institutional erosion but have not necessarily weakened the political agency of individuals. Along with a growing disenchantment and irritation that has fueled a perception of institutions as sources of threat and disappointment, individuals, as I have pointed out, have gained more con ﬁdence in their own abilities and capacities to make their way in the world. They have increased their demands for autonomy but in the context48 


of the heightened value attached to individuality and individual solutions. Strengthened individuals and the questioning of institutions characterize the present situation. As has been pointed out, a lack of individuals ’compliance weakens institutions and weak institutions are a potential threat to democracy (Brinks, Levitsky, and Murillo 2019 ), but this lack also threatens societies themselves ( Martuccelli 2021 ). Of course, institutional politics is particularly affected by this situation. As my latest studies show (Inv. 4, 5, and 8), individuals tend to consider themselves morally superior to institutions, which, in their view, are made up of corrupt congressmen, parties guided by private interests, and so on. They develop irritated ways of relating to institutional actors and of judging them. Additionally, most individuals tend not to recognize political actors as genuine authorities and may even consider institutional politics expendable. In a study of the exercise of authority (Inv. 3), I asked my interviewees to name a true authority ﬁgure. Very few of them named a politician. A signi ﬁcant percentage of respondents initially declared they couldn ’t identify a true authority ﬁgure in the Chilean public sphere. Many of them, in fact, named family members, such as their mothers or fathers. Moreover, the growing importance of self- orientation and self-regulation (linked to the importance of the principle of autonomy and the expansion of new technologies) weakens the idea that politi- cians or those linked to social morality are needed to provide guiding ideas and to translate them into lines of action in individuals ’everyday lives. Yet, it is imperative to stress that all the above does not necessarily lead individuals to abandon politics in the broader sense of the term. They have too long a list of things they want to see changed. They still direct their demands to the institutions and have learned in the past decade, thanks to the successes of mobilizations such as those of university students in achieving concrete changes,28that improvements can be effected through political action. Obviously, this does not mean that they believe they should therefore get fully involved with the institutional dynamics of politics. Many abstain from elect- oral politics or renounce institutional politics for reasons as diverse as passive indifference or outright rejection, as in the case of some strands of detachment that involve adversarial alternatives. But above all, detachment neither mani- fests itself in a single way nor does it entail a complete break. Rather, it leads to highly selective forms of involvement, which tend to be speci ﬁc, are rarely institutionalized, and are guided by an evaluation of situations in which the main criterion is how they affect the actor in individual terms, even if their justifying rhetoric refers to collective issues (Inv. 5). 28For a discussion of the true scope of these achievements, see Penaglia and Mejías (2019) .49 The Circuit of Detachment in Chile https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009310697  Published online by Cambridge University Press


Nevertheless, this circuit does pose serious challenges to institutional polit- ics. To face the circuit of detachment, the latter must reconstruct, almost from scratch, the way it engages the individuals whom it addresses. As I have argued, these are strengthened individuals who disbelieve institutions, are suspicious of mediations, are sensitive to how they are treated, have high and speci ﬁc expectations, and are highly emotional. At the same time, institutional politics must ﬁnd ways to establish links with an archipelago society . Because of various factors exacerbated by detachment, society has come to resemble a group of islands that, despite their differences, appear gathered in con ﬁgur- ations that are a product of their proximity rather than the existence of a common substratum. 6.2 Political Tasks in the Era of Detachment How does one undertake these political tasks in the era of detachment; that is, in a society of strengthened individuals living in an archipelago society? It is of course dif ﬁcult to give a de ﬁnitive answer, but perhaps it is possible to extract some clues from what I have presented so far. Let me mention four. 6.2.1 The Understanding of the Relationship between Society and Politics To begin with, politics, its actors and analysts, need to draw more attention to the fate of the social bond itself. The relationship between society and politics can no longer be approached without making thorough use of the keys to the social processes that run through the former and also, it is worth remembering, the actors of the latter. Both the individuals who are engaged with politics and the political actors themselves are in ﬂuenced by the forms the social bond takes in a society. For example, in Chile, the structural transformations of recent decades have changed society and its individuals in terms of their expectations, demands, judgments, value hierarchies, and self-image. This has had enormous conse- quences for the practice of democracy. As my studies have shown, this transform- ation has altered what Chileans demand from political actors. The manner of treatment, the management of hierarchies, and the leveling of relationships are among the elements that must be considered in de ﬁning what it is to act demo- cratically within a political culture that, in the view of Chileans, was for too long characterized by vertical, authoritarian, elitist, and tutelary kinds of relationship (Araujo 2016 ). Similarly, the language of abuse and disrespect has become the usual expression for what people increasingly perceive to be the result of politic- ally and morally intolerable attitudes. Abusive behavior fuels a sense of lack of public and political legitimacy and is often used as an argument for disobedience.50 


Consider, for example, the following insight gained from my previous stud- ies. As I have discussed, Chileans ’contemporary everyday experiences have become one of the most important compasses to guide their behavior, theirjudgments about society, and their adherence to or rejection of social ideals.This applies also to their relationship with politics and political actors. This isprobably one of the most radical consequences (and signs) of how much weakerthe metanarratives offered by politics have become, and of how misplaced is theconviction that they are capable of shaping societies. The evidence shows thatpeople increasingly base their judgments and ways of behaving on their com-mon and everyday experiences, and not on grand frames of meaning. Withouta doubt, this is a basic element underlying global phenomena such as the loss oftrust in institutions, the expansion of post-truth, or the gradual migration tosocial networks as the preferred source of information. Just as happens withother social spheres, people judge politics and politicians based on their every-day pro ﬁles and are in ﬂuenced more by concrete experiences than by elaborate speeches or abstract notions. Political actors are judged less on the basis of theirgrand achievements than on the basis of their tiny actions. Simple everydayexemplarity, whatever the political ideology or the political positioning, hasmade itself a central element in political actors ’ability to engage individuals. The capacity to connect with basic everyday experiences is one of the mostimportant tools for obtaining support from the electorate or for accomplishingpolitical identi ﬁcation. In summary, processes at the level of the social bond take precedence over those at the political level, a reversal of the way in which this relationship wastraditionally conceived. 6.2.2 The Social Meaning of Institutional Politics Another essential question concerns the meaning that institutional politics and its actors have for society today. In Chile ’s case, this question has been clouded by the political world ’s insistence on strategies de ﬁned by electoral rhythms, timing, and demands. A study I carried out on the relationship between institutional politics andsociety (Inv. 7) showed that party activists, especially young people, wereaware that this primacy of the electoral dimension of politics was one of thereasons for the hostility they encountered in their interactions with people. Infact, as activists of different political parties told us (Inv. 7), one of the importantthings they had to learn when campaigning is how to be “tough ”enough to resist constant verbal –and even sometimes physical –aggression. They had to learn to endure being called “corrupt, ”“thieves, ”or“criminals, ”or how to dodge the51 The Circuit of Detachment in Chile https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009310697  Published online by Cambridge University Press


fruit thrown at them in popular sector outdoor markets. A reason frequently given for this aggression or rejection was, according to these activists, people ’s claim that politicians appeared in their neighborhoods only at election time, abandoning the population the rest of the time. With politicians distant from their constituencies, with no lasting presence to build ties and trust and no everyday experience of local realities to serve as a sounding board, politics have increasingly become a purely transactional matter of supply and demand rather than a source of visions for the future, able to provide images of a desirable, achievable, and common future that could challenge society. Without political actors present in their territories, individ- uals started to see politics as an abstract and distant phenomenon, just at the moment when everyday experience had become their lodestone for ﬁnding their bearings in the social and political world. Electoral politics only increases the distance, because it loses sight of its central task in societies like Chile affected by the circuit of detachment –namely, to give purpose to its existence by defending the relevance of its role for society and individuals. The common accusation that politics is an activity involving purely personal or corporate interests is often nothing more than an expression of the dif ﬁculty people have in explaining to themselves convincingly why politics and politicians should continue to exist. 6.2.3 Polarized Ways of Representing Con ﬂict Another way to face detachment would be to cease contributing to an antagon- istic vision of society through polarized ways of representing con ﬂicts. A polarized vision is nothing new in the country. Despite changes to the nature of Chilean society, the right –left polarization (between prodictatorship and antidictatorship, or the more brutal one of comunachos vs.fachos )29remains an important element in structuring relations between groups and individuals (Hunneus 2003 ). It functions as the basic criterion for differentiation, which cuts across all socioeconomic groups. A second type of polarization ﬁnds expression in a class antagonism that can be characterized, somewhat simplis- tically, as that of “the rich ”vs.“the poor ”(Araujo 2009 ). A third, more recent type of polarization is linked to a logic of competition in which individuals picture themselves in a zero-sum struggle for opportunities (Inv. 5). Thus, the tendency to polarize accounts of con ﬂict perpetuates the country ’s divided character and its tendency to turn con ﬂicts into dead-end confrontations. 29A colloquial shorthand for communists and fascists. From the 1988 plebiscite that ended Pinochet ’s dictatorial regime to the present, the use of this trope has been prominent in every electoral campaign, including in the most recent presidential campaign of 2021.52 


Institutional politics, by reinforcing this tendency, is digging its own grave. Polarization, while it may succeed in gaining votes, deepens detachment. Hence, it serves short-term electoral goals while at the same time eroding long- term political stability. Why? It is well known that polarization discourages democratic, peaceful ways of representing and managing con ﬂict (Levitsky and Ziblatt 2018 ). It also simpli- ﬁes complex political issues ( Innerarity 2020 ) by framing political problems as conﬂicts between binary opposites. But polarization has more than procedural consequences; it also deepens detachment. It weakens the idea of the common by limiting the notion of the collective to people who are like oneself. It strengthens a notion of the collective built upon “proximity ”criteria. Conﬂicts appear as mere dead-end confrontations, thereby brutalizing social life and contributing to the perception of society as a source of harshness and to a perception of the other as above all a source of threat and irritation. Hence, polarization deepens the search for distance and protection from society, but also from politics itself. That is how politics can ultimately erode the conditions of its own survival. There is yet another reason politics should not encourage this radical dis- junctive form of con ﬂict. In this polarized scenario, political actors are the ﬁrst candidates to be viewed as the enemy. After all, for many people, excessiveness and disenchantment are intimately linked to the political class ’s desertion of its role in protecting the population. 6.2.4 Politics and Authority The circuit of detachment poses an extremely important challenge to the exer- cise of political authority. It is not only a pragmatic issue but also a normative one. It addresses the very important issue of how to govern archipelago societies with strengthened individuals. In other words, it addresses the urgent problem of social regulation. Let us take a closer look at this problem. A very important trait of current Chilean society is an ambivalent process concerning the exercise of authority ( Araujo 2016 a). On the one hand, there is an extended questioning of and critical rupture with the elitist, authoritarian, and tutelary model of social relations. Abuse by the powerful, mistreatment from elites w h oi n s i s to nt h e i r “natural ”superiority, the exclusion actively displayed by these elites, and the informal networks of in ﬂuence and power at work in society are all manifestations of the power deregulation Chileans perceive occurring in their society. As we have seen, people consider that they must actively protect themselves from this deregulation. Distancing themselves from institutions or developing forms of detachment are two of the paths that individuals take in the face of this perceived53 The Circuit of Detachment in Chile https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009310697  Published online by Cambridge University Press


threat. Moreover, people link this deregulation with the way in which relations between the political class and other members of society have traditionally occurred. Although power is perceived, at the same time, as a resource of great value and strong social utility, the ways in which the political class manages power are under constant surveillance. In any case, the “traditional ”conception of the exercise of authority, as tutelary and elitist, which was taken for granted as the way one practiced politics in Chile, has become unacceptable to a large segment of the population, especially those who interpret this historical modality as a manifestation of the denial of one ’s own autonomy. Second, despite the rejection of authoritarian ways of exercising authority, indi- viduals tend to consider that the strong exercise of authority is necessary to get things done. That is, the form of the exercise of authority they recognize as ef ﬁcient is precisely the modality that they reject. “Fear of subordinates ”is a widespread phenomenon in Chilean society. Whoever exercises authority fears that if you loosen control, subordinates will, for example, abuse your trust or shirk their duties at work. Consequently, large systems of rules, controls, punishments, and threats must be generated. If you do not exhibit strength, you are at risk of having your authority undermined. These fears encourage the maintenance or reinforcement of authoritar- ian modalities of exercising authority, which encompass political authority. Conventional political modalities of exercising authority are therefore strongly in tension. If politics is essentially an application of the arts of government, it is these formulas of managing the asymmetries of power that are being questioned in society. But this questioning occurs without new agreements on the possible and acceptable ways of managing these asymmet- ries. Moreover, questioning coexists with strongly-rooted authoritarian prac- tices. The former leaves the space open to positions ranging from the most anarchic to the most restorative forms of authoritarian exercise of authority. In the turmoil, space is created for the emergence of tendencies toward the abdication of political authority under the in ﬂuence of a simplistic conception of egalitarianism (which implies a dangerous denial of the power relations that effectively and always exist between all members of society) as well as a disposition toward a rigid authoritarian conception of the exercise of political authority (which threatens basic democratic principles).30 30Belief in the effectiveness of authoritarianism is undoubtedly one of the many factors that explain the outcome of the last presidential election (2021). The extreme right-wing candidate José Antonio Kast made it to the second round of the election. He mobilized the fear of disorder and emphasized his “strong ”authority, which allegedly would guarantee success in solving the problems of citizen insecurity, violence, and immigration. Gabriel Boric, a young candidate from the left-wing coalition Apruebo Dignidad won the election. In the second round he had to shift his strategy and made it clear that he would ef ﬁciently exercise his authority and pledged to avoid social disorder.54 