social groups. This has very important effects. It enables one to feel excused because its widespread presence suggests that “everybody does it. ”At the same time, it naturalizes the situation so that many are simply not aware of the moralcontradiction on which they base their lives. There is an accommodation to the world order, but this is practiced while afﬁrming disbelief in the principles that govern its practices, and at a practical distance, given the social criticism expressed. This combination leads to thegeneration of a distanced relationship with the set of principles that order sociallife, and with the collective. It is a reading in a strongly individual code,however collective the critical rhetoric may be. Detachment from the collectivecorrelates with a way of evaluating the events of the social world that has theindividual as the reference point, and that focuses on the advantages anddisadvantages of these events for the individual. Their attachments to the socialorder are weak, changeable, and feigned. 5.3.4 Adversarial Alternatives The last type of detachment involves a more extreme form of disengagement. It presupposes the generation of alternative worlds that are based on a rejection ofsociety and a confrontation with its principles, logics, and rationalities. Theseadversarial forms have been comprehensively studied by the social sciences intwo of their versions: normative orders that function outside and in opposition tothe law, and movements to transform and radically change societies. But thismodality can also be found in a less extreme and more everyday version thatcannot be explained by theories of marginality or criminality, nor by politicaltheories. While this phenomenon is not recent, it is current and is spreading. Todiscuss it, I will refer to the results of a study of the relationship betweennormative principles and action orientation carried out in the early 2000s(Inv. 2). Myﬁndings showed, as I have already discussed, that the contradictions between social promises and ordinary experiences had given rise to varioustypes of disenchantment. But they also showed that one of the potential effectsof disenchantment was a distancing from the rules and norms that are con-sidered politically, legally, and civilly to be the basis for the regulation of livingalongside others. In addition, this disenchantment led to the idea that theorientation and regulation of action was the individual responsibility of eachperson and not of some type of collective consensus. There was a ﬁssion effect, to use a concept from physics. The effect was de ﬁance and contempt for authority and the adversarial construction of alternative spaces, starting eitherfrom a displacement toward the margins or from the very “center ”of society.45 


Placing yourself on the margin is linked to a selective compliance with the rules as necessary to survive in the social world. On this point, as in the case ofapparent adherence, a quota of pragmatism is present, but it is used minimally.What characterizes adversarial alternatives as a modality is withdrawal toa space that is conceived as governed by arbitrary will. Its consequences areirony and the radical questioning of any authority or of the legitimacy of rules:contempt, as in “the law is me. ” Doing so, from the “centre of society ”involves, just as in the case of apparent adherence, rather than a general questioning of the normative order, its factualerosion accompanied by its rhetorical maintenance. However, unlike in theformer, here there is an active distortion and arbitrary application of the rulesand regulations for one ’s own bene ﬁt, an aspect neatly conveyed by the phrase “I am the law. ” In the phrase “the law is me ”(I give myself the law), the general normative order is undermined. It has suffered a kind of implosion due to social experi-ence. Distrust, the conviction that the order of law is a mere tool for abuse,radical distance, and placing oneself on the margin lead to this position. Asa young adult from the popular sectors commented: “I, I don ’t know, at this point ...I take a totally anti position, I don ’t accept this system, this model, in fact, I don ’t vote, all the same I can ’t stay out of everything. But OK, if there are no rights, you have to take hold of your own things as you like, it doesn ’t matter to me. ” “I am the law ”refers to the identi ﬁcation of the law with the individual or group that it represents. In the name of the law, legal principles or otherprinciples of social regulation are distorted and a corrupt use is made of them.A collapse of the principles that order coexistence has not yet occurred, butpractices contribute to their frequent temporary suspension. This happensbecause people consider that the normative regulation is ineffective so they are obliged to take the law into their own hands. As a young person from the popular sectors said, “It’s like, because with the law it can ’t be done, you have to do it yourself. ”Temporary suspension of law-abiding behavior also occurs because people seek to game the system for personal bene ﬁt. In my studies, this last form appeared strongly linked to institutions or collectives. Belongingto a collective authorizes this identi ﬁcation between the ego and the social law that makes its arbitrary and even abusive use possible. An example is the storyof a young man detained by the police, who falsely accused him of alcoholconsumption to punish him for not behaving with due respect for authority.Another more recent example is the expansion of funas (demonstrations of repudiation against a person or group, conceived as an act of justice) bydifferent movements or social groups. While this modality does not imply46 Politics and Society in Latin America https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009310697  Published online by Cambridge University Press


a desire to permanently place oneself on the margins of society, each temporary suspension of legal principles further marginalizes them. In any of its versions, this modality of adversarial alternatives involves the most determined withdrawal from the common world and a fundamental ques-tioning of the principles of social coexistence. ––– The four modalities of detachment involve different degrees of distance and disaffection from the principles, rationalities, and logics that organize socialrelations and interactions. However, what this discussion has shown is that mostof the modalities do not involve a radical break. The ﬁrst three (refuge, new start, and apparent adherence) involve a relationship of selective acceptance orrejection rather than a radical break, and they have very little stability. The ﬁnal modality involves a more radical and global rejection of the normative frame-work, as well as forms of its arbitrary use that amount to real but temporarypersonal normative universes that affect the relational framework and havepowerfully erosive effects on the principles and logics that govern them. Beyond this difference, however, all these modalities of detachment help weaken a more integral vision of the collective. This is not, of course, because ofthe criticism they mobilize, since this could be considered a motive for changein a situation that they ﬁnd oppressive, but because each of them reveals the effects of a form of individualism that is expressed in thinking about social lifeas highly individualistic, including, at most, considerations about “proximity groups. ”This is, to some degree, a corporate relationship to social life. All four modalities are erosive insofar as they place people imaginatively outside of society, that is, outside its center. This contributes to the virtualabsence of an idea of the common that is recognized for its complexity anddiversity. What is shared in these modalities tends to be limited to those who are“like oneself. ” At the same time, all the modalities help reduce the intensity of the bond with society. None of the modalities con tains elements that identify with society as a whole. They start from the conviction that society is incapable of offering those elements of identity that help satisfy individuals ’need for dignity. Finally, it is worth noting that these modalities do not involve a widespread transgression of norms that is upheld as the acceptable form of collective action. Except in the modality of adversarial alternatives, there is no fundamentalquestioning of what is minimally necessary to make social coexistence possible.As we have emphasized, what is revealed is the selectivity and arbitrariness thatcharacterizes individuals ’relationship with norms and principles.47 