On the other hand, it is also true that these promises have affected how individuals perceive the social world and their expectations of it. Essentially, the promises encouraged people to question the logics and principles that had historically shaped sociability and the relationships between different social groups, and that had been an instrument for preserving social distances and distinctions ( Araujo 2013 ). In other words, the promises destabilized the modal- ities that had sustained social relationships and interactions, and thereby affected the aspect of the social bond that relates to coexistence. Reordering these social principles and logics, then, has ended up being one of the most important tasks that society must face. But this task is challenged by the emergence of a varied collection of irritations in the relationships and interactions that permeate society. It is to this third component of the circuit of detachment that we will turn in the next section . 4 Irritation The studies carried out in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty- ﬁrst century revealed that Chilean society was shot through with a powerful feeling of irritation. It was a society aroused by anger especially, but also a society with a heightened sensitivity to unpleasant affective reactions so that the relationship between stimulus and response frequently seemed excessive. Finally, irritation was expressed in forms of social relations that were charged with friction and in which there was a noticeable deregulation of the use of force ( Araujo 2009 : 171–194; Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. II, 101 –141). Thus, the malaise that had been detected in the late 1990s ( PNUD 1998 ), and that had long been characteristic of Chilean society, had now given way to irritation. This feature has been gaining ground throughout the past decade. Evidence of it can be found in my studies on the exercise of authority (Inv. 3; Araujo 2016 ); on the relationship between institutional politics and citizenship (Inv. 7; Araujo 2019a ); or on social interactions occurring in the streets of the capital, Santiago de Chile (Inv. 4; Araujo 2019b ). Irritation is not only or primarily political, as authors who emphasize this dimension tend to suggest. Rather, it is present in everyday relationships and interactions across the whole of society. Irritation is detected in anonymous and intimate relationships alike, in both the public and private sphere, in established relationships as well as in instru- mental relationships that are episodic and ﬂeeting. They are present at work (with bosses or colleagues), in relationships with neighbors, in interactions on the streets, as well as with actors in institutional politics. While expressions of irritation are varied, they share a common background in the two dimensions of Chile ’s current historical condition: on the one hand, there is the growing28 


pressure in the country for horizontalization of the social bond, and the resist- ance it encounters; and, on the other, there is expansion of the “system ”or “model, ”in which the ﬁgure of the “enemy ”is generalized, the virtue of competition is disseminated, exchange value is prioritized, and people further withdraw from interaction. In what follows I will ﬁrst present some of the faces of irritation and its modalities –anger, hyperreactivity, and the deregulated use of force. I will illustrate them with examples of the kinds of relationship in which they appear: in relations with institutions and with anonymous others. I will then present some of the explanatory clues that my studies have suggested regarding this component of the circuit of detachment. 4.1 The Faces of Irritation 4.1.1 Institutions Irritation directed at institutions is related to moral criticism of the latter. Individuals ’experiences of abuse and mistreatment at the hands of institutions serve to justify a ﬁerce rejection of institutions as well as distrust of and animosity toward them. The experiences I have described of people having to support themselves and their loved ones on their own gave rise to the idea that one could function in the social world without institutions. Whether plausible or not, it was an extremely powerful notion, despite being contradicted by people ’s own practices and expectations (as seen in the bitter criticism of the state ’s failings). It also stemmed from experiences linked to the excessiveness that people had to deal with: the usurious department store loans, the mistreatment by the utility companies, or the immoderate demands and low returns in the world of work, to mention just a few. All of this ended up convincing people that they not only should act without institutions but, even more, they should defend themselves against them. This ﬁnds expression in the stories people frequently told about their need to develop different defense strategies, often accompanied by feel- ings of resignation, helplessness, and indignation. This hypervigilant attitude, expressed as an intense distrust of institutions, has become dramatically more ingrained in recent years: trust in most institu- tions (church, police, armed forces, government, companies, or political parties) has reached a historic low ( Corporación Latinobarómetro 2020 ). But, even more, these experiences have led to everyday expressions of open hostility toward institutions or their representatives, as the following two cases illustrate. In my research in the 2000s (Inv. 1 and 2), public health institutions were strongly associated with experiences of abuse and mistreatment. The long29 


waiting times for access to more complex treatments and operations or over- crowded services were part of this perception, but so were experiences of mistreatment in interactions with staff. People felt that public health services systematically exposed them to humiliation and belittlement. For one thing, they had to face a relentless message that the service was a kind of charity to which they should be grateful. For another, they found themselves repeatedly infantilized. Thus, stories abounded about how health personnel, particularly doctors, “told them off ”and considered them objects rather than subjects. This testimony of a young working-class man is a case in point: “When you go to the doctor he tells you off, you go to the Consultorio20and they tell you off, the relationship between the professional world and the poor is like that, it ’s to put you in your place, it ’s your ignorance, it ’s pointing the ﬁnger at your ignorance ” (Araujo 2009 ; Inv. 1).21The experience of abuse, then, went hand in hand with repressed anger. But this hostility began to be expressed more directly. In recent years, there has been a sharp increase in attacks on healthcare personnel. Although there are no cross-country studies, a survey conducted by the Association of Zonal General Doctors of the Medical College showed that 76 percent of the doctors and 96 percent of other healthcare professionals had suffered verbal or physical aggression and that 50 percent expressed feelings of insecurity ( Gobierno de Chile 2018 ), which led to the drafting of regulations and a law to prevent such aggression and to provide protection.22 Institutional politics is the setting for the second example of irritation with institutions. Between late 2017 and 2018, we carried out a study to explore the relationships between institutional political actors and citizens, as seen from the point of view of the political actors (Inv. 7; Araujo 2019a ). We found that local party activists are frequently attacked and confronted by members of the public. Hostility was a constant feature of these interactions. Many of these accounts revealed, for example, that activists, when canvassing during elections, fre- quently had to endure being called “thieves ”or“creeps ”; had to resist being insulted and thrown out of public spaces; had to face threats and aggressive gestures; or had to protect themselves from objects people threw at them. Note that these hostile encounters had nothing to do with disagreement over political positions –the rejection was not based on ideological differences, whether from the left or the right. Underlying the aggression was a rejection of 20Public primary healthcare facility. 21In a study carried out in 2016 by the PNUD (2017) , these results were supported using quantitative methods. 41 percent of the those surveyed stated that they had had experiences of abuse during the previous year. Healthcare facilities were the most common places where the abuse occurred, followed by workplaces and out in public, that is, on the streets. 22Law 21888 of December 2019.30 


politicians as such. Here, too, the reasons were linked to abuse and deceit. During hostile encounters, people commonly voiced the complaint that politi- cians were only interested in people at election time or that they had come only to take advantage of the public. The intensity of the irritation in these encounters is evident from the metaphors that the activists used to refer to themselves in these contacts with the population: they called themselves “resilient ”or the “soldiers, ”the former connoting survival and the latter connoting warfare (Araujo, 2019a ). 4.1.2 Anonymous Others In the case of anonymous others, an expectation of the other ’s“malignancy ” deﬁnes these relationships, and irritation is the main characteristic of these contacts. This feature, which we had already identi ﬁed in some earlier studies, was more pronounced in our more recent research (Inv. 4 and 5). The testimony of an electrician from the popular sectors summarizes the mood of these experiences: “We are all very aggressive, ”he said, “everyone looks out for themselves, like I want to get this, I want to get there ﬁrst before he does ” (Inv. 5). A study of interactions in public spaces conducted in 2016 (Inv. 4; Araujo 2019b ) showed that the streets were true arenas of everyday aggravation. Of course, the sensation of threat felt especially in poor areas by the presence of crime or drug traf ﬁcking was con ﬁrmed. But a striking aspect of these ﬁndings was the proliferation of rows or scuf ﬂes that broke out in such everyday situations as driving a car, being served in a supermarket, or interacting with a taxi driver. The metaphor of the “jungle ”was often used, conveying an image of an everyday interactive tension between people who were “strong ”and “weak, ”between pedestrians, between motorists, or between men and women. The Santiago Metro is perhaps one of the most telling examples of these moments of irritation. It presents an extreme microcosm of this reality.23The Santiago Metro has greatly increased its capacity in the last ﬁfteen years. While 23In my empirical studies, references to the Metro often serve as a metaphor for society. On the one hand, the Metro is viewed as an expression of social inequality and of the treatment received from society. In 2004, a young man from the popular sectors participating in our studies stated: “There are no poor people here. Like we are all going to feel great since in all the media they keep telling us that we are all great, we are the tops in Latin America. I don ’t know, we arrive here and we see a tremendous metro, but I arrive at the corner of my house and I see three or four kids dumped there. I ’ve known them since they were little kids, and now I see them dumped ”(Inv. 4). On the other hand, the Metro is seen as a manifestation of a highly irritated society. Curiously, the 2019 uprising originated with protests over the cost of the Metro fare, and the Metro was a frequent target of violence in the protests. Many stations and metro cars were destroyed or set on ﬁre.31 


in 2006 it handled 331 million passengers annually, in 2015 the number had increased to 661 million annual trips (Metro de Santiago 2007 ,2015 ). The enlargement of the Metro map meant that more people living in poorlyresourced areas had access to the service. But it also meant a very signi ﬁcant increase in density at the busiest times of day. During the so-called peak hours,density reaches six passengers per square meter, twice the level consideredtolerable and one of the highest public transit densities in the world ( Tirachini, Hensher, and Rose 2013 ). At these peak travel times, which coincide with workers ’morning or evening commutes, people have to resort to various tactics in the ﬁght for space. Abrasive behavior often borders on, or becomes, actual violence. To cope,people plan meticulous strategies and are forced to make use of their (oftenphysical) power resources. Shoving, elbowing, or even headbutting commonlyoccur. People describe these situations, which they experience as undigni ﬁed, as being “treated like animals. ”At the same time, however, critics ’own behavior in this scenario is hard to distinguish from that of those whom they criticize.Often those who voice stern criticism participate in the insults or scuf ﬂes that typically occur in these encounters. These agonistic interactions in the Metro involve not only a ﬁght for space but also a dispute over privileges in its use, well illustrated by what could becalled the “dilemma of the last seat. ”While the order of seating priority once appeared to be clear (the elderly, pregnant women, and women, in that order),today it is no longer so. Standoffs over seats for the exclusive use of seniorcitizens and pregnant women, or ﬁghts over the expected offer of a seat by young to elderly passengers, for example, can trigger violence, which may evenbe reported on social networks. At stake in these clashes are very different viewsabout what constitute valid codes of sociability in society. For many, the Metro, and thus an important part of their encounter with the city, is a punishing experience. It is a vivid expression of the irritations that runthrough society. 4.2 Factors in Irritation Having described some of the faces of irritation in Chilean society, I shall nowexamine factors that might explain this heightened tension in social relations.The factors are certainly very diverse, but my ﬁndings suggest at least four that help elucidate the phenomenon. Theﬁrst and, perhaps, most obvious factor is the effect of the excessiveness and disenchantment that individuals must face. For many, the exhaustion,32 


tension, or anxiety produced by immoderate demands coarsen relationships with others, either because anger and rage produce symptoms of overexcitation or because, as people say, they “lose patience. ”Of course, a contributory factor is the effect of the accumulation of inequalities and discriminatory experiences on individuals ’vision of society. But irritation also appears to be a correlate of the excessive social ideals that people are driven to embody. The two most important ones, we found, are the ideal of competence and the ideal of self- reliance (af ﬁrmed in the concrete experience of having to “scratch oneself with one’s own nails, ”leading to a sel ﬁsh and overpowering individualism). For example, let us look at the impact of the ideal of competence on relationships at work. One of the ﬁndings of the study on the structural challenges that individ- uals must face in Chilean society (Inv. 2) was the widespread experience of “chaqueteo ”(maligning) in the world of work. Chaqueteo refers to practices in relationships aimed at criticizing a person, questioning their merits, depriving them of recognition or destroying their image. The study showed how chaque- teo, without being a new phenomenon in the country, seemed to have intensi ﬁed in people ’s perception, due to the effects of a highly ﬂexible and competitive labor market, which accentuated mutual distrust between workers at a moment when they saw themselves as having little collective capacity to make demands. In this context, people seemed to use chaqueteo as a weapon for individual advancement ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. II, 31 –42). A second factor is extreme sensitivity regarding interactional inequalities, leading to greater awareness of abuse. While this sharper awareness of abuse drives critical denunciation and vindication, it can also encourage irritated and even abusive overreaction toward the other. The presumption that one is being abused or that others are predisposed to abuse one operates as a premise that leads to various kinds of friction. This heightened awareness of abuse is the main ingredient of mistrust. A third factor has to do with the present moment in time, during which the formulas that govern interactions, legitimacies, and the social rationalities that intersect them are being actively rearticulated. The challenge to the old rela- tional logics that were based on the conception of a naturalized hierarchy and source of privileges –as well as on other logics that established unquestionable prerogatives in the use and exercise of power –has not made them disappear, nor have clear new formulas yet emerged to govern sociability, civility, and the management of power asymmetries. This has resulted in widespread uncer- tainty about relational codes, which turns each interaction into a potential arena of dispute. What characterizes a time like this, then, is a lack of certainty about what people can legitimately expect regarding the treatment they receive from another, and what they should give to the other depending on the status and33 


social position they temporarily occupy at each relational crossroads. Versions of how to solve these questions proliferate without being consensual and culminate in confrontations in concrete situations. The uncertainty, and the emphasis placed on con ﬂicting normative versions, end up straining relation- ships and producing abrasive interactions that people perceive as exhausting (Inv. 4, 5, and 6). A fourth factor is related to the path followed by the four social logics that have historically participated in shaping social interactions, which we described in the previous section . Two of them, naturalized hierarchies and privilege, have been strongly criticized, and this criticism has achieved public and political visibility and relevance. They have been challenged by the pressure for egalitarianism, but also, paradoxically, by two aspects closely linked to the social ideal promoted by the“model ”: the celebration of merit and the appeal to the self-reliant subject. While it is true that hierarchies and privilege have not disappeared, it has become harder and harder to justify them in the public debate and the force of criticism has sufﬁced to gradually limit and sanction them. Constant surveillance, with the help of cell phone cameras, feeds the public space with denunciations of practices such as the ill-treatment of beach supervisors using class arguments ( “my time is worth more than yours ”)24or clashes over the use of lakesides (which, while being for public use, have tended to be privatized de facto).25These complaints tend to have repercussions and elicit resounding social sanctions. The other two social logics encountered –authoritarianism and the exercise of power –have become more paradoxical. Although criticism of both, and particularly of authoritarianism, has increased, they have become more preva- lent across society. This is especially true of the logic of the exercise of power. Thus, a study on the exercise of authority in Chilean society (Inv. 3; Araujo 2016 ) provided evidence of a reappraisal of what constitutes a justi ﬁable exer- cise of power and widespread criticism of authoritarianism, the customary and historical form the exercise of power has taken in the country. Authoritarianism has two central features. First is the mobilization of implicit coercive resources when exercising authority. As Pamela, a journalist interviewed for this study, put it: “Obey or ...[claps one hand against the other] a punishment, a reprimand or something negative is implicit. ” Second is the expectation that the other must proffer “mechanical obedi- ence, ”which is based on a modality of exercising authority that assumes a tutelary relationship with “subordinates, ”curbing their scope for autonomy. 24www.elmostrador.cl/dia/2021/ 03/03/yo-te-pago-el-suelo-mu jer-responde-molesta-ante- peticion-de-colocarse-mascarilla-en-zapallar/ . 25www.latercera.com/nacional/noticia/donde-esta-limite-bien-uso-publico-la-propiedad-privada- los-lagos/519028/ .34 