As one interviewee said: “You have to obey because you are no good for anything else, that is just what you have to do ”(Inv. 3). However, we also found that this criticism was accompanied by the judgment that authoritarian- ism was the only ef ﬁcient way to procure obedience. Moreover, we found that there was a tendency to use the term “authoritarianism ”as a synonym for authority. Because authoritarianism is a vector of widely shared criticism, the idea of authority was dif ﬁcult for them to discern, recognize, and justify. Dismissing authority by confusing it with authoritarianism makes its exercise difﬁcult even in nonauthoritarian forms; that is, it even destabilizes more democratic attempts to exercise authority. The persistence of authoritarianism is connected to what has happened to the logic of the exercise of power. The confrontational use of power and the ability to impose upon others are considered by many to be essential ways of coping with social life (Inv. 1, 2, and 5). This social logic has been enhanced in recent decades by the ideal of competitiveness, the primacy of exchange value, and the presumption of abuse and its correlate, distrust. This is linked to a perception of society as a complex web of powers whose exercise is unregulated; to a society that conceives of power as a source of abuse and humiliation and therefore as a factor in the erosion of social life, and yet at the same time considers power the most important resource to achieve goals, protect oneself from others, and access resources. Society, as a young man told us, “is a war of power. ” (Inv. 1; Araujo 2009 : chap. 2, 3, and 7). In such a context, the possibility of more egalitarian relationships is weakened because signs of horizontality tend to be read as signs of weakness ( Araujo 2016 ). In short, based on what we have seen, society appears as a battle ﬁeld on which, with no consensus as to what constitutes a legitimate exercise of power, all exercises of power, except one ’s own, come under suspicion. Thus, if the processes that we have been studying have helped erode the conventional ways in which asymmetries of power were managed in social life, they have not yet provided new ways of solving this problem. In this context, the perception of social life as antagonistic in nature appears to be widely shared and the “law of the jungle ”makes inroads among a society of strengthened individuals ( Araujo 2019b ). Irritation settles in and expands. 5 Detachment 5.1 A De ﬁnition Detachment is the ﬁnal component of the circuit that comprises different manifestations of excessiveness in the structural demands expressed in every- day challenges; of disenchantment with material promises but also with35 


promises of the democratization of social relations; and of multiple expressions of irritation both with institutions as well as between individuals. By“detachment ”I mean an irregular and multiform process of estrangement and disengagement from the principles, rationalities, and legitimacies that order the social bond. Detachment is associated with a loosening of the links that bind us to society and the common life and with a loss of synchronization with the customary relational modalities and mechanisms that make social coexistence possible. Detachment, crucially, is an active current in society that cuts across all social groups. The concept does not describe a consolidated state of society, nor does it affect the society as a whole. It has several modalities and it does not affect all spheres of social life uniformly. However, it does affect the notion of “the collective ”and therefore that of “the common. ” Unlike the notion of anomie, as used by Durkheim (1979) , the condition I seek to describe is not the inability of shared norms to regulate individual desires and aspirations but, rather, a situation in which individuals feel disenchanted and oppressed by the excessive demands of socia l life, by the daily irritation it causes, and by the broken promises regarding the norms governing relationships; a situation, moreover, in which individuals have internalized the conviction that solutions must be individual. Detachment, thus, is an individual solution to protect oneself and respond to the harshness of social life, which can take various forms. In this sense, Robert Merton ’s version of anomie ( 1938 ) also does not apply to the phenomenon I am seeking to describe. Merton derives his approach from a Parsonian reading of Durkheim and focuses on a type of anomie that he attributes to a lack of correspondence between the cultural ends promoted and the legitimate means to obtain them, an analysis he used to critique the culture of success in American society. In detachment, the disjunction between means and ends is not always or necessarily the central issue. Instead, what we are concerned with is the fear or conviction that one must defend oneself and keep one ’s distance from institutions and others, such that one prefers a degree of social isolation. In this sense, this phenomenon would be closer to “retreatism, ”one of the responses to anomia identi ﬁed by Merton, but by no means involving the complete abandonment of society that the author considers deﬁnitive of this response.26Detachment supposes a type of retreatism that does not imply wholesale disaf ﬁliation from society. 26For Merton, there are several responses to the situation of anomie. Conformity is usually construed as being the absence of anomie (both cultural ends and means are accepted). The other responses are innovation (cultural ends are accepted but illegitimate means are used to obtain them), ritualism (cultural ends are abandoned but conventional means are followed ritualistically), retreatism (both ends and means are rejected as in the extreme case of those who are in society but are not of society), and rebellion (both ends and means are rejected and their substitution is sought) ( Merton 1938 : 676 –679).36 


Detachment not only refers to the regulatory norms of society but also has consequences for the forms of bonding. Contra Durkheim ’s separation of the two ideas (anomie would explain the lack of normative regulation and egoism would explain the quality of the bond), the phenomenon of detachment throws light on the intimate relationship between both phenomena. It helps to delineate the contours of the two faces of the social bond. In describing the quality of adherence to the idea of society or “the com- mons, ”detachment cannot be reduced to an effect of egoism. That the solutions weﬁnd in detachment are individual in nature cannot necessarily be taken to mean a disregard for others. In this sense, detachment does not correspond to the situation of moral anarchy described by Buchanan (1986) . But what character- izes these “others ”is that they belong to “proximity groups. ”They feature a strong concern and availability for the other, but only if the other has some characteristic that de ﬁnes them as close (e.g., they think alike; share ﬁlial sentiments or friendship affects). In regard to the social bond that involves the quality of regulation , detach- ment describes a dif ﬁculty in articulating forms of action and evaluation of the principles and logics that underlie those practices. Rather than producing a break with these principles and logics as a whole (although this appears in one of its forms), detachment leads to uncertain, contradictory, or dislocated uses of them and to idiosyncratic formulas for renewal or modi ﬁcation. Detachment, then, does not refer only to the proliferation of no-go areas (Dahrendorf 1985 )–where noncompliance with the norms would be expected – or to a weakening of sanctions. While detachment may take this form, it is not a feature common to all situations. Neither can it be said with any certainty that Chilean society is “on the road to anomia, ”as Dahrendorf understands it; that is, on a trajectory wherein norms lose validity due to their lack of social ef ﬁciency and cultural morality and anarchy ensue from the weakening of authority (1985: 24–26). While this might eventually be an outcome, there is nothing to make it inevitable or even probable. It is not possible today to equate detachment with social disintegration, because detachment can take so many different forms. Detachment does not necessarily imply a break with the principles of coexist- ence. It does, however, in every case, involve a more or less pronounced distancing from and disaffection with the collective. While the modalities of detachment are varied, as we will see later, detach- ment is usually justi ﬁed on the basis of 1) the exhaustion produced by all the demands of social life, which we have discussed in previous pages, and 2) all the moral criticisms arising from these experiences. Having presented the factors that contribute to detachment, I turn now to the moral critiques that underlie it.37 


5.2 Moral Reasons for Detachment As previously discussed, neoliberalism does not entail the suppression of morality but, rather, the fostering of a new morality ( Amable 2011 ;Davies 2014 ). The transformation of Chilean capitalism did not only involve changes to the economic infrastructure but brought with it a new model of society and of the subject, a set of representations and values that became robust social ideals. The most salient of these, according to research, were the image of a mobile and competitive society; the value attached to personal ambition and individual effort; an image of people as strictly responsible for their own personal fate; and the social value attached to the idea of ownership, all linked to a model of integration via consumption and credit (and not salary). These images imprinted themselves on individuals and institutions ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 ). Following Bourdieu and Foucault, much of the literature on the effects of neoliberalism starts with the idea that its success depends on individuals ’adher- ence to it, which, while neither re ﬂexive nor conscious, is the result of their internalizing or adopting its constraints and values ( Bröckling 2017 ;Dardot and Laval 2009 ). My ﬁndings showed that the case of Chile does not support this assumption. As the neoliberal model and its ideals spread, so did powerful critiques of it, linked to signi ﬁcant moral tensions. As discussed in the previous section , these criticisms were forged by pressures for social democratization, both by the magnifying effect these pressures had on individuals ’perceptions of abuses or inequalities and by their contribution to the rhetoric of these criticisms. In most cases, the prevailing perception was not one of adherence but, rather, of the de facto imposition of what study participants called the “system. ” Indeed, in two studies –one carried out between 2003 and 2007 ( Araujo 2009 ) and the other between 2007 and 2011 ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 )–we detected a profuse moral criticism of the “system ”coming from individuals from very different social and political backgrounds. It had, in fact, become a dominant social interpretation, even among those who had reasons to defend the economic model. All these criticisms highlighted the excessiveness of the demand to embody the ideals of the subject proposed by the model, due to the moral contradiction that it would entail between the critics ’own ideals –which were largely socially active because of the effects of the current of social democratization –and their concrete practices, as well as the widespread moral indolence to which it would have led. The four main moral criticisms of the model that recur in many different studies ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. I, 71 –81;Araujo 2009 ; Inv. 5) are38 


that the model morally erodes society and its individuals because it 1) boosts competition; 2) demands that appearances be kept up; 3) feeds consumerism; and 4) injects materialism into society. Competition pushes one to be abusive and predatory. This criticism ﬁts with a vision of society as a constant battle of powers. Indeed, according to a survey used to document the social structure in the Metropolitan Region of Santiago, 79.7 percent agreed that the economic system led to competition, making affect and solidarity between people more dif ﬁcult ( Mayol, Azócar, and Azócar 2013 ). In the words of a postal worker: “why did we come to that, why can ’t we be happy, why do we have to live so stressed out, causing us so much rivalry, so much sel ﬁshness, which is a strong word, that ’s why I say to be a little more humanitarian, it ’s hard, it ’s very hard ”(Inv. 5). Consumerism, for its part, seems to be responsible for having commercial- ized social relations and emptied people of their moral sense. In Chile, “people are very contaminated with the issue of consumerism, they live to work and to consume, ”a small trader from the popular sectors told us (Inv. 5). It distorts priorities and leads to feelings of emptiness and spiritual impoverishment. But consumerism alters family relationships too. The result is that family demands are structured in those terms, transforming the signs of love and care. Referring to his children, an artisan commented, “it is as if they are born connected with a cable from before birth, they are already connected with a cable, so the bombardment is not controllable ”(Inv. 2). The excessive demand to keep up appearances is evidence of the spread of social pretension and is fuel for inauthenticity. Criticism of the cult of appear- ance cuts across all sectors of society because all have experienced it, whether linked to the recognition of status, especially in the case of the wealthy sectors, or used as a strategy to protect oneself from abuse and discrimination, as in the popular sectors ( Araujo 2009 ). In either case, it promotes super ﬁciality. Finally, materialism and the dominance of money in de ﬁning social value exclude spiritual principles, non-economic considerations, and above all, the ethical dimension of relationships with others. The words of an engineer are illustrative: “We are traitors, we are all scoundrels, we are all mules, and we all go for the money, nothing else, like a bunch of pirates and mercenaries, nothing more ...like those animal species where the weak are thrown out, cut off from the herd, and die far away ”(Inv. 2). Materialism, spiritual emptiness, and a lack of solidarity are frequently linked in this critique. But, while moral criticism featured constantly in the discourse of individuals, this did not necessarily imply an abandonment of practices that indeed re ﬂected what was so bitterly criticized. The weight of their knowledge of the logics governing social life, distilled from their own experiences, is an important part39 


of the explanation for this. While interviewees felt able to express these criticisms, they understood that there was no way out and that not complying would be too costly for their survival or interests. While the normative ideals that spread during these decades were powerful rhetorical tools to legitimize criticism, they were too weak to ful ﬁll their function of inspiring individual acts (Araujo 2009 ; Inv. 5). Under the wing of these ideals, a series of different moral contradictions emerged, when the very practices (competitive, materialistic, etc.) individuals felt compelled to adopt clashed with the social, moral, and sociability values that they considered important. These contradictions persistently distanced individuals from their ideal selves and prevented them from being the kind of people that felt they should be. Both criticisms and contradictions, as we will see, underlie to differing degrees the varieties of detachment described below. 5.3 The Modalities of Detachment Detachment takes various forms, which reveal the different and contradictory currents running through contemporary Chilean society. In my work, I have found four varieties of detachment: refuge, a new start, apparent adherence, and deﬁant contempt and the adversarial construction of alternative worlds (Inv. 5). Let us examine each of these in detail. 5.3.1 Refuge In this version of detachment, neither the normative frame nor the principles of social regulation are actively questioned, but forms of protection are sought in a quest for less-exposed spaces, as if moving from center stage to the wings. Refuge-seekers aim to protect themselves from the relentless coercion of a system that pushes them to their physical and mental brink, or to shelter from the irritation of social relationships. But they also seek to avoid moral contradiction. What they hope to achieve is what many interviewees considered their most important goal: tranquility, which they frequently equated with happiness. Their criticism does not lead to adversarial expressions but to the search for ways, whether imaginary or real, of protecting themselves. This modality offers another option beyond Hirschman ’s (1970) famous trio of exit,voice , and loyalty . In a given situation of discontent, actors not only have recourse to strategies of escape ( exit), protest ( voice ), or adherence ( loyalty ); they may also pursue forms of disengagement or displacement that enable them to remain and support themselves in the same situation in which they ﬁnd themselves –a sort of attenuated exit strategy. Let us consider a couple of examples.40 


Aﬁrst example is provided by one of the ﬁndings of a study of how individuals support themselves when facing the social challenges that they encounter (Inv. 5). One of the most important existential anchors individuals mentioned, and by far the most common, was to cherish an expectation of moving in the future to the south (an area of the country featuring forests, lakes, and rivers, linked to representations of human warmth and natural beauty) or to the countryside. This expectation for the future appeared both as a desire and as the outline of a plan ( Araujo 2018 ). This expectation expressed individuals ’hope of one day being able to leave behind the need to be competitive, aggressive, and indifferent, or the need to deal with the irritations that arise in daily encounters with others. It expressed the dream of not having to raise children with the threat of crime and drugs and of not having to respond to the requirements of appearance. The south and the countryside appeared as imaginary spaces where there would be a greater experience of humanity (kindness, slower rhythms, courtesy) and where longed-for tranquility, the opposite of excessiveness, would be found. This expectation runs across social sectors and is not restricted to inhabitants of the capital, although it is found only in urban areas. Those who live in smaller cities also dreamed of leaving them for a life in more protected (rural) areas. For example, a woman named Oriana, from the capital, believed that she could ﬁnd in the countryside “the simplicity of the people, the humility of the people ”that does not exist in Santiago. Pedro, a resident of a coastal provincial city, considered that in the countryside people were less envious, happier, more loving, and more receptive, so that there one could relax the attitude of constant vigilance and distrust that, in his view, characterized his everyday experience. A second example of this modality of detachment is the extremely wide- spread desire to work for oneself. While for some, self-employment is an expectation for the future, for others it is a current reality. In many cases, it is an activity conducted in parallel with formal wage labor. In other cases, self- employment is a present or past stage of a career path whose stability cannot be guaranteed.27The concrete realities are multiple, but what is central is its signiﬁcance and its use to support oneself in social life. In the great majority of cases, this form of work is viewed as desirable or, more strictly, as preferable. People invest in the idea of self-employment their hopes of leading more livable 27According to the National Socioeconomic Characterization Survey of 2015, 19.2 percent of workers were self-employed. It is a segment that is growing and is the second most important group in the Chilean labor market. The precarity of self-employment can be seen from the fact that 50 percent of the self-employed have a monthly income of less than CLP 200,000 ( Venegas 2017 ), which is less than USD 300.41 


lives, even though self-employment is regarded not only by experts but by the individuals themselves as highly risky, poorly protected, and vulnerable. The appeal of self-employment is related to the excessive personal toll of wage labor. A study carried out with self-employed workers from popular sectors ( Venegas 2017 ) found that salaried employment was associated with a lack of recognition. The demanding nature of salaried employment and the lack of control over their time interfered with individuals ’ability to respond to family demands, and exposed workers to arbitrary and abusive treatment by bosses as well as to management irrationality. In this context, working for oneself was recognized as being more demanding, with a greater burden of insecurity and precarity, but it was viewed as a route to recovery from moral damage, a path to personal dignity, and a way of gaining control over one ’s time. For those who did not harbor dreams of escaping to the south or to the countryside, the hope of future self-employment and independence acted as an existential anchor. Unable to completely abandon the world of work, their only option was to protect themselves from what they considered the greater evil, which is, paradoxically, to fend off the harshness of dependent jobs. Refuge is a form of detachment that opts for retreat or displacement, whether real or imaginary, toward what might be called “shielded zones. ” 5.3.2 The New Start This modality of detachment has several points in common with that of refuge. It also aims for protection against the excessive demands of social life and, like the quest for refuge, aspires to the ultimate state of tranquility. It differs from refuge, however, in that it involves active ways of constructing alternatives. Protection here is not conceived as a mere blanket but is thought of as integral to the construction of other worlds and actively involving other subjects. Its key content is the transformation of lifestyles. This modality places the potential for change at its center. It produces ﬁnished versions of a new world that are able to defeat the demands of a system that imposes highly competitive attitudes, tensions between different spheres of life (such as work and family), or neglect of what for many people are the most important source of meaning: children. It is not, however, about changing the social world or combating the lifestyles of others. It is about the nonadversarial construction of alternative worlds: ﬁnding spaces, whether relational or geographical, that make it possible to change oneself and one ’s way of living. Let us return to the case of the south and the countryside as expectations for the future to illustrate this type of detachment. If some of my interviewees associated going to the south or to the countryside with the idea of refuge,42 


others did so with the idea of making a new start in life. Perhaps a good way to illustrate the distinctiveness of the latter position is to compare how theseexpectations are described by two of my interviewees. In the refuge mode,a young entrepreneur, a naval engineer, said that he had the idea with his wifeto go south, but to be “calm, alone, in our world. ”In the new start mode, a health professional told of her dream plan of going to the south with herpartner to start a small organic farming business that would allow them tohave a different relationship with nature and with themselves. The new startmodality occurred particularly in young adults from the well-off middleclasses. Two factors –stage of life and available material resources –contrib- uted to aspirations for the future, which were presented in the form of a pilotplan in these cases. Nevertheless, the dream cuts across social sectors. It iswell illustrated by the observation of an owner of a coffee shop in his ﬁfties who, with great admiration, said that more and more young people weredoing what he would have liked to have done but could not do now, owing tohis age and responsibilities: “They are going to live in towns, they are leaving the city, they don ’t want to be city dwellers; they want to make a change, starting by changing their lives. ” In these cases, moral criticism was sharper and more organic, and the value, emotional, and affective dimensions were of the greatest importance. Thisalternative world also had as its main constituent the adoption of more natural,slower, more strenuous, less well-paid, but ultimately happier ways of living;a world in which a different relationship with nature, stemming from increasedawareness of and concern for the environment, was a frequent and widespreadfeature. This new start would allow them more time for themselves and theirsigniﬁcant others; help them create new forms of relationship with their sur- roundings; enable them to be more responsible for the fate of the environment;allow the cultivation of new values such as empathy and solidarity; and make it possible to live with fewer moral contradictions and, therefore, to live a more authentic life. A 47-year-old researcher and university lecturer in the area ofnatural sciences, who also hoped to go south one day, had as a model some“schoolmates who live supporting themselves in the countryside ...they eat what they plant, and they bring up and educate their children, and the only thingthey have electricity for, with these solar things, is to connect to the internetonce a week and for their cell phones ”(Inv. 5). The south and the countryside appeared, then, as spaces that could be turned into the setting for a new lifestyle. The new start refers to a world that theywould participate in creating by transforming themselves: a substantial changethat demands new performances.43 


The modalities of the new start and refuge have in common the effect of weakening the density of links with global society. Both involve a strategy, whether imaginary or real, of moving toward the edges, distancing themselves from what they imagine to be the central nucleus of society. Ultimately, their motivation is the construction of protected worlds. Both cases involve individ- ual responses or include, at most, the forging of links with very restricted “proximity groups, ”thus narrowing the extent of the shared world. Neither case involves a radical break with the normative foundations of the social order itself. But, in the modality that we have just analyzed, all this is also linked with sharp moral criticism, a longed-for change of personnel, and the consistent replacement of a selected set of social values and relational principles that they perceive as erosive for them and their lives. 5.3.3 Apparent Adherence In this modality, unlike the previous two, there is no exit strategy. Apparent adherence is more about permanence. It is a case of staying and doing what needs to be done, for which one must know very well how things work and take advantage of all the opportunities that come one ’s way, while mobilizing an ideal and edifying discourse that takes the form of moral criticism of the social world (Inv. 1; Araujo 2009 ; Inv. 5). In this modality, escape from “the system ”is viewed as impossible. The “system ”is criticized in a condemnatory and even bitter tone, accompanied by exacting moral judgments, but given that one is obliged to remain in “the system ”and no exit is possible, one determines to extract as much bene ﬁta s possible from the situation. Thus, all one ’s skills and abilities are deployed not only to successfully pass the tests one must face but also to bene ﬁt as much as possible in each situation. Thus, social life is approached by seeking in each situation to extract an advantage or limit a disadvantage. Hence the paradoxical mixture of pragmatism, idealism, and instrumentalization that accompanies this modality of detachment. Also, unlike in other modalities, in apparent adherence individuals do not seek to avoid moral contradictions but, rather, to learn to live with them. This requires a complex task of self-justi ﬁcation or, simply, dissociative formulas that allow criticism to continue to be expressed while simultaneously practicing what is criticized. It is a form of detachment that is also individual, like refuge, but exists on a mass scale in society. It is individual because it requires especially demanding personal performances, but also because, given the contradiction it entails, it cannot be explicitly collectivized. It is massive because it literally cuts across all44 