2 Excessiveness 2.1 Neoliberalism and the Historical Condition 2.1.1 Neoliberalism As a Concept and Model Neoliberalism is the name given to a type of economic model based on the imperative of promoting free markets and on the belief that market self- regulation via competition will bene ﬁt the economy. With variations, the model depends on the deregulation of individuals ’relationships with the market and envisions the state ’s role as limited to safeguarding competitive practices in the market. As a correlate, the neoliberal model envisions the state abandoning many areas of social provision previously within its purview. Neoliberalism promotes depoliticization by prioritizing an economic and moral vision of society; legitimizes a perspective centered on the individual, rather than on collective structures; and aspires to understand and mold society on the basis of these principles, institutions, and relational modes ( Amable 2011 ;Davies 2014 ). Finally, neoliberalism ’s most visible political and economic effects in recent decades have been the growing importance of the ﬁnancial sector, a sharp increase in inequality, a signi ﬁcant increase in returns to capital at the cost of diminished returns to labor, and altered ways of thinking about collective experience ( Harvey 2005 ;Streeck 2011 ). Neoliberalism takes various forms depending on the country in which it occurs. Chile was one of the ﬁrst countries in the world to change its policies and institutions based on neoliberal principles. Chile began with a series of economic measures that progressively took shape as a “model, ”including privatization of state companies; the state ’s retreat from the direct provision of social services, and the subsequent commercialization of these services; a state based upon the principle of subsidiarity; economic liberalization and deregulation; the opening of markets to international competition; and labor ﬂexibility, among others ( Salazar and Pinto 1999 ;Ruiz and Boccardo 2015 ). These measures aligned with neoliberal principles: they eroded a redistributive conception of social protection, weakened worker protections and forms of collective labor organization, strengthened individual solutions over collective ones, and promoted an economistic view of society. Chile ’s implementation of neoliberal policies, introduced after the 1973 coup under the military regime of General Augusto Pinochet (1973 –90) by the so- called Chilean Chicago Boys, who were taught and directly in ﬂuenced by Milton Friedman ( Valdés 1995 ), encountered some obstacles over time and underwent various modi ﬁcations along the way ( Büchi 2008 ). First, in the 1980s, power shifted to a more pragmatic team that gave greater scope for8 


state action and proposed new measures in response to the country ’s serious economic crisis ( Collier and Sater 1999 ). Second, adjustments occurred that made the business sector a major social actor ( Ruiz and Boccardo 2015 ). Third, consolidation of the model occurred in association with the return to democracy in 1990 and the subsequent twenty years of uninterrupted government by the Coalition of Parties for Democracy.7 A distinctive aspect of Chilean neoliberalism is the oligopolistic control of markets with an extreme concentration of property in most sectors of the economy ( Ruiz and Boccardo 2015 ), a phenomenon Schneider (2013) has called hierarchical capitalism . Another distinguishing feature is that the model ’s consolidation bene ﬁted from a surge of wealth in the Latin American region due to the so-called commodity boom that began in the mid-2000s. This boom was particularly spectacular in a country whose economy depends more on income from natural resources –primarily from copper mining –than does the economy of any other Latin American country ( Ordóñez and Silva 2019 ). The conception of the functions of the state was a very important aspect of the neoliberal model. Within the neoliberal framework, the state ’s role was to be reduced to supplying what other actors, such as families, private parties, or individuals, could not or would not supply. State economic intervention was to occur only in extreme cases, and the state was not the only entity that could provide social services; private companies also could serve as providers. Chile ’s adoption of the neoliberal model resulted in a sharp reduction in state provision of social services and protections. The erosion of the ideal of univer- sal provision of services and protections to the entire population in favor of support targeted at very vulnerable groups ( Raczynski 1994 ) undermined the feelings of solidarity that form the core of the social bond. One effect of this erosion was that Chileans lacked adequate protection from predatory market actors, leaving them vulnerable to the “ﬁne print, ”or abuses. 2.1.2 Neoliberalism Experienced At the same time, “neoliberalism ”is the name Chileans give to what they call the“system ”or“model ”shaping their day-to-day lives. Chileans recognize this “system ”as one of the two factors that give form to the combination of constraints and challenges that must be faced in social life, that is, as one of the factors that shape their historical condition (the second factor, discussed in Section 3.2 ,i s the pressure to democratize social relations) ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 ). 7The so-called coalition did not alter either the productive or the economic structure in any essential aspect, but it developed an increasingly successful network of social protection for the most vulnerable ( Espinoza, Barozet, and Méndez 2013 ;Garretón 2012 ).9 


The term ﬁgures increasingly in individuals ’accounts of their lives from the early 2000s until the present day. Unlike the way neoliberalism is typically discussed in European and North American debates on the subject, in Chile the term refers to a system that seems to many Chileans to have been imposed on them by force rather than because of any belief they may have had in it. Indeed, since the late 1990s, the consequences of neoliberalism have been viewed increas- ingly critically across society, except perhaps by the most privileged and protected members of society. Yet, these criticisms tell only one side of the story, for Chileans can point to vario us ways in which neoliberalism has beneﬁted the country. For example, Chile has experienced a reduction in poverty. While the exact numbers remain subject to debate,8there is no question that the prevalence of poverty has decreased, or at least that its nature has changed. A new face of poverty has emerged, linked to increased access to consumer goods. The increased availability of household appliances and other household goods lies at the heart of this change. In 1987, 7 percent of households with the lowest income owned three assets such as a washing machine, a television, a refrigerator, or a gas cooker. By 2002, about 74 percent of households in this income bracket owned three or more of these items ( Ariztía 2004 ). Beyond a simple question of status, this increase in ownership of durable goods brought about a real improvement in Chileans ’quality of life. Between 1992 and 2002, a third of the needy Chilean households obtained electricity for the ﬁrst time. During the same period, the percentage of poor urban households that lacked access to potable water dropped from 20 percent to 8 percent ( Ramos 2004 ). Another especially important change has been the increase in levels of schooling and the new groups that have received higher education. In 1992, 46.49 percent of Chileans over 25 years old reported that primary school was their highest level of education and only 11.7 percent reported having com- pleted postsecondary studies (e.g., in universities, technology institutes, tech- nical education centers). By 2017, the percentage of the adult population who had completed only primary school had dropped to 25.6 percent while the percentage of those who completed higher education had risen to 29.8 percent (INE 2017 ). 8There have been changes in the measurement of poverty. In 2009, it changed from a one- dimensional, income-based measurement to a multifactorial measurement comprising four dimensions until 2015, and thereafter comprising ﬁve dimensions. Despite the variation in the percentages produced by each type of measurement –the percentage of the population living in poverty in 2017 measured by income was 8.6 percent; with four factors, it was 18.6 percent; and withﬁve factors, 20.7 percent –all of them show a downward trend ( MINDES 2020 ).10 


These changes in the level of educational attainment involve achievements and experiences that represent true watersheds in family histories. In 2014, 49 percent of Chileans felt their social status had improved compared with that of their parents. The majority also reported that their level of income (58 percent), work situat ion (54 percent), and family life (53 percent) had improved, a perception that has only increased since. For example, in 2019, 62 percent of people surveyed considered that their income was better or much better than that of their parents ( PUC 2019 ). A great many of my interviewees from the working- and middle-class sectors (Inv. 2 and 5) have memories of the much harsher living conditions of their grandparents or even parents. Earthen ﬂoors, a lack of shoes, and even hunger stand out in the stories they narrate of their childhoods. As the youngest interviewees acknowledge, the opportunities they have had are different and far better than those available to their parents or grandparents. Family historical memory, then, yields a positive evaluation of how far the country has progressed combined with the hope that their children will do still better. Additionally, this feeling of improvement is associated with a sense of greater proximity to other social groups, which has contributed to raised expectations and a change in beliefs about what one can legitimately aspire to achieve. This optimistic assessment, however, coexists with another certainty: that the costs of these quality of life improvements are disproportionately borne on the shoulders of ordinary folk. That is, collective betterment has come hand-in- hand with a transfer to individuals of the management of their own social integration. This transfer has manifested in individuals having to face an accumulation of excessive demands in their everyday lives. These experiences atﬁrst were associated with a diffuse malaise, as diagnosed by the Programa de Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo (PNUD) in the late 1990s, but came to nurture various feelings of discontent, increasingly accompanied by strong doses of anger and indignation. 2.2 The Faces of Excessiveness I use the word excessiveness to refer to the quality of structural demands or exigencies individuals must confront in their ordinary social lives: immoderate demands that involve an incessant drive to action, which create the perception of being overtaxed and under pressure, and that very often are experienced as a breach of one ’s limits (physical, health, motivational, psychic, etc.). Many types of excessiveness can be identi ﬁed (Inv. 2; Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 ). Examples include excessive experience of vulnerability (living without a safety net); the excessive demands of the ideal fostered by neoliberalism (competition,11 


self-effort, performance, and materialism, among others); excessive pressure to adapt to historical changes by developing new skills and inventing new strat- egies; and excessive inequality (in the distribution of goods and wealth). For reasons of space, I will not describe these in detail but will concentrate on two other examples of excessiveness that seem especially threatening for people in their everyday lives: excessiveness in work and in the management of time. 2.2.1 Excessiveness in Work Once installed, the new model confronted individuals with the need to deal with new circumstances as economic and labor subjects. The workplace under the impact of the 1979 Labor Plan promulgated by the Pinochet military dictator- ship has been characterized by the normalization of precarious and ﬂexible terms of employment, as well as weakened worker protections and collective bargaining power ( Ramos 2009 ;PNUD 2017 ;Julián 2018 ). The new frame- work of labor relations is based on individualization, commodi ﬁcation, and decollectivization ( Stecher and Sisto 2019 ). Added to this are the low wage levels of much of the population. By 2020, two out of three workers were earning less than CLP 550,000 after tax (the equivalent of USD 750 per month in 2020 and USD 600 currently) ( Durán and Kremerman 2020 ). The changes also brought a notable intensi ﬁcation of work and new subject ideals ( Soto and Fardella 2019 ). From the perspective of individuals, the installation of the neoliberal model and its consequences shape what could be considered the central feature experienced in the world of work: its excessiveness. This can be seen in everyday life from the various ways in which individuals have had to deal with the challenges of work. As an example, let us analyze just one of them: pluriactivity . There are two types of pluriactivity: serial pluriactivity, that is, careers during which the type of employment varies substantially, and simultaneous pluriac- tivity, in which people perform different jobs during the same period for different employers (for example, adding a weekend job), engage in diverse independent activities (for example, working in multiple small enterprises), or a combination of both. Unlike in other countries, such as in Europe, where a single work activity tends to be the norm ( Mouriaux 2006 ), pluriactivity is a common practice among people in Chile today, especially but not exclusively among those in the popular sectors ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. II, 18–31).9 9I use “popular sectors ”to refer to lower-income sections of the population that share not only economic traits but also social and cultural ones.12 


A compelling reason for the expansion of pluriactivity is that it functions, like credit and indebtedness, as a backstop that allows a standard of living to be maintained when wages from a single job are insuf ﬁcient to cover living costs. Such costs have been strongly impacted by the reduction in good quality state- sponsored social provision (particularly in the areas of health and education), by changes in expectations and de ﬁnitions of a decent minimum income, and by insufﬁcient state regulation of the market that determines the costs of services and goods.10Added to these increased costs is the constant feeling of insecurity arising from the lack of labor protections. Indeed, with the reduced wages they receive, many families have had to deal with the rapid privatization of education and health services and the erosion of their quality. In 1987, an average family spent 3.76 percent of its income on education, while in 2017 it spent 5.6 percent on this item ( INE 1988 ;INE 2017 ). Of the OECD countries, families in Chile pay the highest percentage (34 per- cent) of education costs, compared with an OECD average of 12 percent (OECD 2020 ). The increase is important not only for the middle-income sectors but also for lower-income sectors. Owing to parents ’evaluation of municipal (free) schools as extremely poor, recent decades saw a signi ﬁcant student migration to subsidized private schools (schools receiving state support but to which parents contribute a monthly fee).11From 2006 to 2020, enrollment in municipal schools decreased by 33.4 percent, while it increased in subsidized private establishments by 14.3 percent and in fee-paying schools by 22.8 percent (MINEDUC 2020 ). By 2020 subsidized private schools constituted 54.4 percent of the students enrolled in the school system, fee-paying private institutions 9 percent, and municipal schools only 32.5 percent ( MINEDUC 2021 ). The same is true of health provision. The Chilean health system comprises three different forms of administration. One is exclusively for the armed forces and law enforcement personnel, and the other two are accessible to the civil population: the state-run National Health Fund (FONASA) and the private healthcare insurance companies (ISAPRE), the latter created under Augusto 10Alfredo, a worker from the popular sectors, is a good example. He works “from 6:00 in the morning until midnight ”so with the money he earns from overtime, he can buy “a cooker with two gas canisters and also a dining table ”(Inv. 2). 11The Chilean school education system consists of ﬁve different forms of management: municipal schools (public schools administered by local governments at the municipal level); local public education services (since 2018; they are meant to replace municipal administration); delegated administration corporations (corporations that manage state educational establishments); private subsidized schools (partial public subsidies for private schooling); and private schools. According to the Ministry of Education ( MINEDUC 2020 ), during 2020, 54.35 percent of students were enrolled in private subsidized schools, 32.46 percent in municipal schools, 9.01 percent in private schools, 2.95 percent in local public education services, and 1.23 percent in delegated administration corporations13 


Pinochet ’s regime. Salaried workers must contribute 7 percent of their wages to FONASA, but since Pinochet ’s reforms workers have been allowed to use this mandatory expenditure to purchase private health insurance. Gradually, due to the increased cost of private health insurance, individuals have been required to pay extra fees to remain in the private healthcare system. Many, therefore, have had to return to the public system. According to FONASA (2018 ), in 2018 there were 18,929,311 people assigned to the health system. Of these, 75.2 percent belonged to FONASA, 18 percent to ISAPRE, and 6.8 percent to the health system of the armed forces and law enforcement personnel. Bene ﬁciaries of FONASA are grouped into four tranches according to their monthly taxable income: A –people without economic resources (including migrants) and people who receive family subsidy; B –people earning income equal to or less than the established minimum wage (MW), around $390; C –people earning more than MW but less than $576; and D –people earning over $576. Theﬁrst two groups receive a bonus of 100 percent for healthcare provision. For group C, the bonus covers 90 percent and for group D, only 80 percent of healthcare expenses.12As a result, according to the OECD (2019 ), the average percentage of healthcare expenditure that Chileans pay out-of-pocket (33.5 per- cent) is the ﬁfth highest of all the OECD member countries. Out-of-pocket expenses are the direct payments people make when using health bene ﬁts. According to INE (2017) , healthcare costs account for 7.6 percent on average of Chileans ’monthly household expenditures. Moreover, this high expense rate is accompanied by dissatisfaction with the healthcare system, especially the public one. Research has shown that the long waits for care, the de ﬁciencies of the healthcare system, the poor treatment received, and the awareness that money plays a prominent role in securing rights and respectful treatment led Chileans to expect better service in the private sector (similar considerations led them to also expect better education in the private sector) ( Araujo 2009 :7 0 –77). For example, during the so-called social outbreak of 2019, one of the most important forms of expression was the ubiquitous graf ﬁti and protesters ’banners and placards. These not only served to express demands but often posed counterarguments to the authorities and commented on their decisions. The following was one of the many expressions 12Two types of care established by the health bene ﬁts system are available through FONASA. One type is the Institutional Care Modality (MAI). It is available to all groups and medical bene ﬁts are granted by the agencies that make up the National System of Health Services, which are dependent on the Ministry of Health, or by public or private entities with which the health services or FONASA have reached agreements for this purpose. The second type is a voucher system, the Modality of Free Choice (MLE), available for groups B, C, and D. Here the beneﬁciaries freely choose the professional and/or entity under the tuition and control of FONASA, from the public or private sector, registered in the role of FONASA.14 


that challenged authorities ’statements about the violence of the protesters: “VIOLENCE is the fact that my patients ask, ‘and do you know how much it would cost if I do it privately? ’BECAUSE THEY ARE TERRIFIED OF HAVING TO CONTINUE WAITING ”(Molina 2020 : 38). In fact, by 2018 the number of patients who were waiting for a consultation in a new specialty (non-GES)13was 1.5 million and their average waiting time was 483 days. The COVID-19 pandemic increased the number of people on this waiting list. By mid-2020 there were already 1.7 million ( Bastias et al. 2020 ). Apart from the increased cost of living, the pressure for pluriactivity was also accentuated by the widening gap between needs and expectations and the reduced purchasing power of wages. The de ﬁnition of minimally decent (and necessary) living standards changed radically over this period. A pertinent example is spending on communications, now considered a basic good and a factor in social integration. The percentage of household expenditure on communication increased from 0.97 percent of the family budget to 5.3 percent between 1978 and 2017. A major reason for this was the increase in the number of items in this category. In 1978, the category basically consisted of telephone bills, while in 2017 it consisted of thirty-three items, including mobile phones and internet connections ( INE 2017 ). Another factor encouraging pluriactivity is status insecurity (positional inconsistency), a phenomenon that affects how an individual ’s social position is structured ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. I, 125 –159). Aside from those who compose a small, durable, and globally protected group (in a country that has an extreme concentration of wealth and power),14most individuals feel that their social position is extremely susceptible to deterioration. Although, of course, such vulnerability varies by social sector, various potentially destabiliz- ing events can happen to people in all sectors without warning and drastically affect both their career and their social position. A serious illness or acquired disability is the most feared eventuality. It may produce a sharp drop in status since the only way to cope with it, aside from intrafamily solidarity –or, in the case of popular sectors, raising funds from neighbors by holding events such as bingo games or raf ﬂes15–is by accruing debt that is impossible to repay. 13The Explicit Health Guarantees (GES) apply only to a limited and speci ﬁc list of diseases. Special bene ﬁts are guaranteed by law to people affected by these diseases whether they are afﬁliated with FONASA or ISAPRE. The waiting lists for consultation of new specialties correspond to the pathologies not included in the list covered by the GES. 14According to the World Inequality Database ( WID 2019 ), in 2019, 10 percent of the population of Chile earned 60.2 percent of all income, while 1 percent earned 27.8 percent of all income and the bottom 50 percent of the population earned only 10.1 percent of the total income. 15Another example seen on a Santiago wall during the 2019 protests: “No + Raf ﬂes or Bingos. X a decent health ”(Molina 2020 : 66).15 


Whatever the reason, pluriactivity essentially helps heighten the sensation of excessiveness. It is associated with high levels of stress and is often linked to jobs that either afford little protection or are purely informal, increasing vulner- ability. It both produces high levels of individual burnout and erodes workers ’ perceived physical and mental health.16 2.2.2 Excessiveness in the Management of Time The growing prevalence of pluriactivity, coupled with the general trends in the nature of work experience, has direct consequences for how much time work consumes. One of the most common experiences in Chile today is a feeling of saturation and fatigue produced by the perception of “endless work ”that eats into family and personal time. For pluriactive wage earners, as one of my interviewees said, it means having to make “the schedules ﬁt”; for independent workers or owners of small- and medium-sized businesses, the overinvestment of time is constant and structural due to the fragility they perceive in their activities. In the various studies I conducted, interviewees frequently mentioned working ten-hour or twelve-hour days.17Long working days, however, are common even among wage earners with somewhat less precarious jobs. In these cases, the overinvestment of time is due to working overtime or to the “logic of presence ”–a widespread expectation in the world of work that the worker should remain in the workplace for as long as possible, without there necessarily being a reasonable justi ﬁcation for it or any productivity conse- quences. “Keeping the chair warm, ”as several interviewees pointed out, is taken as an indicator of being a good worker. For many interviewees, this logic was counterproductive; it made them less productive and served simply as an informal control mechanism, but its effects were powerful since it was experi- enced as a veiled threat ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. II, 161 –172). To all of the above must be added the demands of commuting times, a special problem for residents of Santiago, the country ’s capital, and a particular hardship for the popular sectors. Santiago residents can spend up to two hours commuting each morning ( CNDU 2020 ). 16Work leave for mental illness represents the second-largest expense in medical leave applica- tions granted: 53.8 percent for depressive episodes, 21.8 percent for anxiety disorders, and 16.8 percent for severe stress and adjustment disorders. Note also that the segment of the population with the highest prevalence of depressive symptoms is those of working age (Errázuriz et al. 2015 ). 17Adolfo, a young professional in his early thirties, states, “I work a lot. I am in a crisis, in fact, because I am very tired in fact, because I work a lot. I work every day, Saturdays included ...So they are long working days, 12, 14 hours ”(Inv. 2). This quotation is representative of many of the testimonies recorded in this and other investigations.16 


The time-greedy nature of work has important consequences for the experi- ence of imbalance in time management, which is widespread throughout soci- ety. The feeling of suffocation that many report is associated with time being conﬁscated by work, with much less of it available for associative activities or for free time.18Most problematic for people, however, is the squeezing of time left available for the family sphere. This arouses intense feelings of tension, conﬂict, and guilt, especially for women. In the case of men, the persistence of their role as economic provider works as a protective shield against these feelings. Normatively speaking, the family is the most important sphere. By “family, ” we refer to the couple and/or their children –the inner, closest circle –but also to their outer circle: parents or other signi ﬁcant relatives. The normative preemi- nence of family obligations is not only linked to the historical weight of kinship relations and the family in Chile and the Latin American region as a whole but also to the contemporary fact that family is the most signi ﬁcant source of support needed to face social life. According to my ﬁndings, when an individual must respond to structural demands on their own, the family is the resource most often mobilized to solve problems of housing, health, and the most common childcare issues, or to provide small “rescue ”loans at moments of temporary economic dif ﬁculty. Family relationships, however, need to be cared for and cultivated purpose- fully and carefully. Time is a resource of the utmost importance for this cultivation. This is due to the predominance of “clan-like ”forms of relationship and a strongly legitimized family sociability. The clannish character is expressed in the well-de ﬁned boundaries and a certain closedness with which family sociability tends to be structured, with strong commitments and ritual demands as well as rigidly de ﬁned roles ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. II, 168–181). Caught between these con ﬂicting needs –the nonnegotiable demands of the world of work, the feeling of falling short in one ’s family obligations, nostalgia for associative activities, and the need for personal time –the effort to manage one ’s time is an overwhelming experience. It is yet another expression of the multiple excesses that pervade contemporary social experience. 18Verónica is a woman from the popular sectors who works making clothing. She says that she has no time for social life: “Every day I have the problem of needing to make money, producing clothing items, then I fall asleep at 1:00 or 2:00 in the morning and start working at 6:00 in the morning. ”17 