2.3 Excessiveness and Individuals Social change, for normative and material structural reasons that lie at the heart of the Chilean historical condition, has forced individuals to develop new skills, performances, and self-representations to face a life shaped by constant uncertainty and material and moral instability. Moreover, it is a transformation that, as a study in progress shows, occurs in a context in which individualism, in its combined juridical, economic, and social expres- sions, appears for the ﬁrst time in the history of the country as a true and legitimized social ideal (Inv. 8). At the same time, this need for hyperactivity takes the form of an enormous effort to mobilize informal supports. Individuals are driven to become relational hyper-actors (Araujo and Martuccelli 2014 ). Outcomes have shown that, as a result of their experiences, individuals develop a new and forti ﬁed self- image and increased con ﬁdence in their own capacities. Experiences, now dating back several decades, of facing social life individually, or with only the help they are able to get from their close kin and associates, have led individuals to view themselves as capable of coping with social life on their own. In this sense, these ﬁndings do not support the claim ( PNUD 2015 ) that Chileans ’ strengthened self-image is primarily attributable to political factors. Paradoxically, it is the demands this new economic and social model places on Chileans in their everyday life that has inadvertently led Chileans to view themselves as more capable people. However, this stronger self-image has had unexpected consequences. For example, Chileans increasingly believe that it is possible and even desirable to act without institutions, a belief related to the feeling of detachment. To appreciate this phenomenon in all its nuance, we must ﬁrst look closely at the second component of the circuit: disenchantment. 3 Disenchantment 3.1 The Neoliberal Promise The neoliberal model promised Chileans a better life. From the beginning, the model ’s implementation was accompanied by the idea that social and economic improvements depended on individual effort. This idea permeated all forms of social organization by impacting labor relations; relations between the state and its citizens; the role of the market; and people ’s own practices and beliefs. This early association between the improvement of people ’s living conditions and individual effort is present in one of the slogans of the Pinochet dictatorship: “Make proletarians into owners ”(Pinedo 1997 : 5).18 


The individualization of responsibility for one ’s own social existence ended up producing new strategies for coping with social life and, as we saw, had the unintended effect of strengthening individuals ’estimation of their abilities and capacity to cope with social life on their own. At the same time, however, such enhanced capacity was linked to growing disappointment with the unful ﬁlled promises of the model and individuals ’perception that the costs were being disproportionately borne on their shoulders. The role of economic inequality as a factor contributing to this disenchant- ment has been much debated. According to the PNUD (2017) , whereas in 2000 only 42 percent of survey respondents strongly agreed that income differences in the country were very large, by 2017 90 percent of respondents espoused this view. However, this sensitivity to structural economic inequalities developed slowly and disenchantment had three major sources: the existence of a ceiling on people ’s possibilities for improvement; frustration at the low returns to personal effort; and the experience that, even after certain improvements were achieved, people often suffered a deterioration in their situation. 3.1.1 Ceilings and Borders Expectations of social mobility are perhaps one of the clearest expressions of how people perceive the existence of a ceiling blocking improvements to their quality of life. Neoliberalism made two promises: One was that effort would allow people to ascend the social ladder. The other was that the popular sectors or working classes would enter the ranks of the middle classes in increasing numbers. Both promises failed to materialize. Using data from 2009, Espinoza, Barozet, and Méndez (2013) argued that even then the social structure was becoming more rigid: Chileans were less likely to be in a substantially different occupational class from that of their parents than ten years previously. The expectation that many people from the less advantaged socioeconomic groups would enter the middle class proved illusory (pp. 182, 187). Furthermore, as Pérez-Ahumada (2018) has pointed out in a study of changes to the Chilean class structure between 1992 and 2013, the growth of the middle class has been relatively marginal. Rather, the trend has gone in the other direction: it was the working class that grew between 2003 and 2013. In the last year of the study, the informally self-employed and the working class together accounted for around 75 percent of the population (182). Of course, what can be deduced from these structural data is not necessarily reﬂected directly or immediately in people ’s perceptions of their social status. Nevertheless, qualitative data do show a steady waning of belief in these promises of upward mobility. To take one example, until the 2010s, my studies19 


showed that popular sector Chileans espoused a class-based explanation for their social experiences –that is, things happened to them because they were poor –but in their global perceptions of society, “the poor ”always referred to others, not to themselves (Inv. 1 and 2; Araujo 2009 ). This partly explains why so many consider themselves to be middle class. At present, the attribution of typical experiences to their social position, the importance of their position in structuring their demands, and their positional identity are all closer to one another, as can be seen from an analysis of recent material (Inv. 6). The poor are also themselves. 3.1.2 Poor Rewards The second ingredient of disenchantment, the perception of poor returns to individual effort, begins with an aspect that we have already discussed: low wages, or low income in the case of those who work independently. This perception is found across the different socioeconomic sectors. It is present, for example, in the sentiments of Eduardo, a designer in his thirties from the popular sectors, who explains that he has only just enough to scrape by: “I pay my rent, I pay my water, electricity and chao [that ’s it], there are times when I don ’t even have enough left to eat. ”But it is also true of Fabiola, an event planner from the wealthy middle sectors who became seriously ill due to overwork; her strenuous effort served only “to pay the bills ”(Inv. 2). But low wages are not the only aspect of disenchantment with the poor returns to effort invested. Education is another. The expansion of access to higher education has been an especially notable phenomenon in recent decades. The number of students who are the ﬁrst in their families to attend college is considerable. This expansion, which promised integration and upward mobility, has entailed dedicated effort by families, but also by young people themselves taking out loans to pay for it. More than a third of higher education students ﬁnance their studies out of family resources, but about a quarter contract loans, while 16.6 percent work while they study. Only 17 percent have a scholarship and 5 percent pay for their studies with their savings ( Cox, Hernando, and Rebolledo 2018 : 40). Student loans have been a particular source of debate and of student movements ’demands since 2011. They generate high levels of long- term debt so that, as some have argued, in order to study, young people end up mortgaging their future and lowering their aspirations. Moreover, efforts invested in higher education have generally not yielded the expected payoffs. First, because educational quali ﬁcations lost value as they became commonplace, the type of quali ﬁcation needed to secure better oppor- tunities in the job market was constantly upgraded. Thus, although educational20 


qualiﬁcations still affect job opportunities because the overall rate of return remains positive in the country, they are by no means a guarantee of social mobility to match people ’s expectations. The precariousness of the labor market is a factor in this, but the distribution of opportunities is also highly dependent on factors such as social background, appearance, and surname ( PNUD 2017 ). However, while it is true that opportunities are not obtained solely with a degree, and opportunities are often dependent on a network of contacts or strongly in ﬂuenced by class, education paradoxically continues to be seen as the only element that could eventually be relied on to counterbalance the power of these personal networks ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 ). This may explain why, despite their onerous experience of taking out loans to pursue higher education, 63 percent of young people between 18 and 29 years old consider the ﬁnancial burden worthwhile; they do not consider it an (undue) debt, but an investment (INJUV 2020 ). 3.1.3 Deterioration A third stream contributing to disenchantment is the experience of one ’s situation deteriorating rather than improving. The case of housing is a good example. According to Rasse (2019) , in the 1980s and 1990s, the popular sectors ’access to housing increased, and this meant a drastic reduction of the housing shortage. However, the trend subsequently reversed. According to Rasse, this was an outcome of the substandard quality of the newly constructed homes and weak efforts at urban social integration, due to the location of these homes on the city ’s periphery where there existed few opportunities for work, health, education, and recreation. Despite the government ’s social policies and the various programs implemented to improve neighborhood infrastructure and resident satisfaction, a large percentage of the social housing stock progres- sively deteriorated. Indeed, much of the feeling of positional inconsistency detected in my studies was related to the deterioration of interviewees ’neighborhoods, due to both the poor quality of services and, especially, the growing threat of drugs and crime. For many, this deterioration not only threatened the quality of everyday life and their children ’s future but very speci ﬁcally the value of their homes, which they had acquired with great effort. For many, their home was the most important asset they had to provide some permanence to their social status ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. I, 148 –154; Inv. 2 and 5). At the same time, the deterioration of living standards is manifested in the ever-greater dif ﬁculty experienced by new low-income households in gaining access to housing, due to an increase in land prices resulting from the lack of21 


regulation and the speculative strategies of real estate investors. This has led to a higher number of people living in campamentos (self-built informal settle- ments) and of allegados (families forced to lodge with close relatives). In the Metropolitan Region of Santiago, the number of allegados increased from 37,319 to 175,377 between 2000 and 2017 ( Rasse 2019 : 111). A second example is indebtedness and overindebtedness. According to the Central Bank (2020), for the second half of 2020, the total debt of households equaled 76.4 percent of their disposable income, the highest level of indebted- ness in the country ’s history. While debt initially promised access to goods and lifestyle improvements, it became for many in Chile an oppressive way of life, a destabilizing routine. As Marta, a paramedic from the popular sectors, put it, most Chileans “live our whole lives in debt ...You ask the bank for some money, you pay it, you ﬁnish paying it ...and back you go into debt! ”(Inv. 2). But this experience is not limited to the popular sectors. Mariana, a middle-class woman, commented: “The debts are what have most people feeling so over- whelmed, the debts trap you and take your life away. I had a really bad time, really bad, I even got to the point of wanting to take pills [to commit suicide: KA] out of desperation ”(Inv. 5). The neoliberal model involved the ﬁnancialization of the economy and even of many aspects of social life ( Harvey 2005 : 33). In Chile, as in other Latin American countries, the expansion of consumer culture went hand in hand with access to credit. Between 1997 and 2005, the number of credit cards for every 100,000 inhabitants increased from 1,520 to 2,365. Similarly, credit card use during this period increased by 139 percent ( Morales and Yáñez 2006 ). Access to credit for low-income individuals was also facilitated by credit offerings from non-banking institutions (i.e., retailers). Many critics of the neoliberal model make a direct link between debt and the culture of consumerism, which they considered a central factor in cultivating feelings of alienation among the population ( Moulian 1998 ). My studies showed, however, consistent with other ﬁndings, that consumerism should not be considered merely a hedonistic expression of alienation. Consumption is often a tool that helps make care transactions possible in a family or neighbor- hood ( Han 2012 ). Credit and debt, moreover, have served to close the gap created by the combination of low wages, the rise in the cost of living, and new beliefs about what constitutes a minimally decent living standard. Credit also eases the intense pressure for the preservation of status among the more af ﬂuent sectors ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 : Vol. I, 65 –71). Overindebtedness is a problem that has long existed in the United States and European countries, but it has tended to be interpreted as a con ﬂict between modern, consumerist values on the one hand and those of simplicity or22 


moderation on the other ( Bell 1976 ;Beck 1992 ). By contrast, in Chile over- indebtedness is strongly associated with a society that has collectively shaken off responsibility for the personal fate of its members. This abnegation of responsibility can be seen in the preservation of structural traits that force people to rely on credit and indebtedness to meet basic needs. It can be seen in the weak regulation of interest rates, particularly the rates of the retailer- issued credit cards most commonly used by the popular sectors. It can be seen in the absence of efforts to build collective awareness of reasonable credit limits, instead of devolving to individuals the responsibility for de ﬁn- ing moral or pragmatic boundaries to protect themselves against excessive debt (Inv. 2 and 5). But disenchantment is not only a matter of the promises derived from the economic model. It is also strongly linked –and this has been its most important early expression –with disappointment over the promises associated with the pressure for democratization of social relations. 3.2 The Promise of Democratization 3.2.1 Equality and Subjects of Law In Chile, both the collapse of democracy in the early 1970s and its return in the 1990s were active moments in the con ﬁguration and reaf ﬁrmation of demo- cratic values. During the dictatorship, “democracy ”was a hope and an objective while with the end of the dictatorship, in the early 1990s, it became a task. The task was achieved only to a limited extent. Despite this fact –and this point is central –the discourse of citizenship, the notion of rights, and the principle of equality were strongly asserted. While this discourse was not new to Chile or the region, it underwent a new expansive wave as the democratization processes unfolded ( Dagnino, Olivera, and Pan ﬁchi 2006 , among others), forming part of the so-called process of citizenization in Latin America ( Domingues 2009 ). The model of the individual as a holder of rights and the ideal of equality that underlies it were increasingly championed as normative ideals by different actors. Thus, the task of strengthening law as a legitimate and ef ﬁcient regula- tory ideal of society permeated the task of modernizing the state, making law a basis for the declaration of principles regarding the conception of society, its individuals, and its relations with them ( Drake and Jaksic 2002 ). The model was promoted by the institutional political system and gradually also by conserva- tive sectors, most forcefully in their version of equal opportunity. Social movements –especially, but not only, feminist groups –also participated in promoting the ideal of equality and, in line with the international trend, shifted their demands toward the paradigm of rights and citizenship ( Garretón 2000 ).23 


They broadened the ﬁelds in which equality was to be applied, extending it from the purely socioeconomic ﬁeld to include others such as the struggles of women, Indigenous peoples, or sexual minorities ( Vargas 2008 ). These developments took place in the context of a heightened receptivity to the agendas of inter- national organizations, the United Nations system, and other institutions such as the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank. The spread of the promise of equality, of course, has also had very important cultural inputs. The media have played a very signifcant role in this context, by transmitting relational models that re ﬂect and encourage greater equality. For example, national soap operas began to show active, self-suf ﬁcient, and capable women who gained space in dramatic con ﬂicts; children began to be repre- sented on television as agents and not only as objects of adult decisions (Vergara, Chávez, and Vergara 2010 ). Moreover, access to the Internet was growing, which allowed greater access to other content and debates, as well as more horizontal forms of participation. Finally, mention should be made of sociodemographic changes, particularly the signi ﬁcant increase in access to education. Of course, an intention to spread new principles or representations does not necessarily mean that they are adopted in practice. In a study carried out in the mid-2000s (Inv. 1), I set out to discover the fate of these normative possibilities. Myﬁndings showed that people recognized rights as being ideal attributes that were available to subjects to build an idea of themselves, but what they mainly took from the concept was the promise that it conveyed: equality (Inv. 1; Araujo 2009 ). Equality was no longer the domain of enlightened “vanguards ”; it had become an ever-present reference point used by ordinary individuals to judge and evaluate their daily experiences in society. A key ﬁnding of this study, con ﬁrmed in others that followed, was that people ’s preferred understanding of the term “equality ”concerned the treatment of individuals in everyday interactions. This translated into new expectations of horizontality in such relationships. Expectations of horizontality refers to the hope that an interaction involving the management of asymmetries will be based on recognition of a basic equality between the participants; that they will receive the same treatment in everyday interactions regardless of their social status, the symbols of distinction that the other can mobilize, or the relationship to power that they can display. It is a demand directed both to institutions and to others that helps restore the signs of personal dignity and the preferred indicators of respect ( Araujo 2013 ). But while individuals recognized and adopted these ideals and expectations, their everyday experiences showed them a different reality. Four systemic social logics persisted, which continued to structure interactions. These logics belied24 


the power of the ideal normative principles. Individuals recognized them as historically prevalent logics in Chilean society ( Araujo 2013 ). First is the logic of naturalized hierarchies. This presumes the importance of ascribed traits (family origin, skin color, etc.) in a highly vertical relational architecture, expressed, for example, in the widespread feeling of the popular sectors that the only eyes that see them are the eyes of surveillants ( Araujo 2009 : 45–58). Second is the logic of privilege, based on gender and generational and ethnic criteria, but mainly on class. It is a logic embodied, for example, in fake meritocracy, in nepotism –a recurring practice of the political class –or in a society in which surname and family networks are crucial in determining opportunities. Third is the logic of authoritarianism, perceived as a manner of exercising authority that is pervasive and extends throughout society; a manner that makes force, whether virtual or real, into a permanent possibility and demands machine-like obedience from those over whom it is exercised ( Araujo 2016 ). Fourth is the logic of the exercise of power, where the unregulated use of power and confrontation de ﬁnes access to goods, prerogatives over their use, or a person ’s very place in society. Thanks to the action of this logic, the social space is perceived as a space for the exercise of power. As a participant in one of my studies said: in this society, “the strongest puts his foot on the weakest ”;n o matter what type of relationship it is, there is one who can “always put his foot on someone else ”(Inv. 1). The clash between expectations of horizontality and the continuing reality of these logics has undermin ed the promise of equality, with very important consequences. It has brought about the emergence of a new sensibility, a new appraisal and ju dgment of the customary practices of actors, whether of the upper classes, politicians, or of other individuals encountered in everyday interactions. This has been expressed in the importance now given to what we have called interactional inequalities , a particular type of inequality centered on patterns of face-to-face inter- action whose main content is mistreatment or abuse.19It has spotlighted the contradictions of a society that likes to appear modern and egalitarian and has even proposed institutional mechanisms designed to achieve this state, but is actually organized by a deeply vertical social bond. The term “abuse, ”often used by my interviewees in the 2000s, became an expression 19A type of inequality whose lack of legitimacy has grown over time. According to measurements carried out in recent years, interactional inequalities are the ones most resented by people in Chile (in all socioeconomic sectors and age ranges studied); they are resented much more than economic inequalities ( PNUD 2015 : 99).25 


commonly used to refer to that which they found intolerable. By the latter part of the 2010s, “abuse ”had found its way into public discussion, had become politicized, and was one of the m ost important terms for referring to the unacceptable, the morally unjusti ﬁable, and the politically unpardon- able (Inv. 7). However, the force of social experience led, paradoxically, to the fact that, although people criticized the social logics described above and demanded that they change, individuals did not necessarily alter how they behaved with others. Authoritarianism continued to function as a guide for their own behavior. The exercise of power is still considered the most advisable way to tackle relation- ships with others, especially in moments of argument or disagreement ( Araujo 2016 ). This is an area that I will explore when discussing irritations. For the moment, I will pause to consider a second dimension of disenchantment with the promise of democratization. 3.2.2 Merit My work has shown that merit has become an essential element of people ’s feelings of justice. This should not be read solely as a result of the neoliberal push for success and personal effort –that is, within the framework of meritocracy. The promise of merit reve rberates in Chile as a tool, legitimized by the principle of equality, against the reign of the logic of privilege and naturalized hierarchy. For example, it provides a way out of a social world that has historically tended to coun ter the action of these two logics by mobilizing informal resources of in ﬂuence, pitutos (well-placed contacts), to get a job or a medical appointment, which in turn establishes new privileges ( Barozet 2006 ). Thus, a belief in merit can be read as a promise of democratization of opportunities and rewards, and as the access route to a recognition of one ’so w nm e r i t –something rarely present in individuals ’ experience, especially of those in the popular sectors ( Araujo and Martuccelli 2012 ). But everyday experiences showed Chileans that the promise of merit also remained unful ﬁlled. The argument of a woman from the middle class expresses it well: “For example, if we were all friends and you were promoted to general manager, I mean we are all protected. Whether or not we produce results ” (Inv. 1). Even having merit ( “doing a good job ”) in the rare ﬁed and barely transparent world of work could turn out to have negative repercussions. In the words of an upper-middle-class business manager, displaying merit could be negative because it would make you too expensive for the company or very “risky for someone within the system ”(Inv. 2).26 


Despite the promise of merit, moreover, people rarely experience recognition of their own merit. This is a frustration that has been identi ﬁed in several studies of the Chilean workplace ( Stecher, Godoy, and Aravena 2020 ). Aﬁnal piece of evidence of the broken promise of merit is the fact that networks and in ﬂuence continue to be active and effective. A very large number of people interviewed in one of my studies (Inv. 2) spontaneously acknow- ledged having made use of pitutos recently. 3.3 Disenchantments and the Social Bond This gap between promises and experiences has had important consequences. Of course, the problem is not the existence of this discrepancy. For example, the promises made by a normative principle, such as equality, are fundamentally an orientation and an impulse to work toward the realization of an ideal. It is impossible to expect a perfect crystallization of the normative principle because this crystallization is nothing more than an effect, always precarious, of the permanent con ﬂicts that take place in a community ( Rancière 1995 ). Reality never corresponds exactly to what the promises of equality or welfare produce in the imagination of each person and in that of the collective. However, the magnitude of the gap between them can vary, and this magnitude is never trivial with regard to people ’s judgments, attachments to, or rejections of their own society. The experience of broken promises has produced in Chile a rich vein of disenchantment, some of which we have described in this section. It is the basis of a very critical vision of the social world, its institutions and actors. But it is also at the root of a disbelief: in the words of the participants, there exists a widespread conviction that the promises of society are “a tremendous fallacy. ” In turn, this leads to a breakdown in the credibility of institutions, of people, and of society itself. Aﬁssion occurs in the social bond when the relationship to normative ideals is established on the basis of mistrust, impotence, or, in an even more worrying version, radical rejection. Citizen engagement –a condition for the stability and strengthening of democracies –is then jeopardized. At the same time, disenchantment has been accompanied by the preserva- tion of practices contrary to the ideal s on which individuals built their critical views. The persistence of these practices is due to the fact that experience shows them to be important in facing social challenges. This has created a set of moral contradicti ons, which, together with disbelief or indignation, have led, as we will see later, to the production of varied forms of detachment.27 