 11 represents one of the most spectacular cases of this social fact observed several times47 . From a certain threshold of existence, the apocalyptic sect , on the condition that it remains united, has a strong capacity to maintain itself , whatever the circumstances . Proof , if any were needed , of the psychic and collective power of what Freudian psychoanalysis calls denial or denial48 . The historical strength of the apocalyptic sect lies in its capa city to organise ways of living in accordance with an alternative reality to that known or recognised by most other members of society. Faced with the denial of the end of time comes the denial of the present time. A historical look at all the "religious non -conformities" of the Middle Ages allows us to affirm that, taken as a whole, they acted as a vector for the regeneration of religion and society , a way for them to "rethink themselves and reintegrate themselves into a whole in transformation", to "respond to a new reality pushed back by the primitive body", in particular , historically, to the social reality of a more collective , massiveand visible poverty49 .This is undoubtedly why some anthropologists, such as the British Africanist Victor Turner, have made millenarian movements a paradigmatic example of a social 'counter -structure' or, better still, of what he has called, on the basis of the study of rites of passage 'in stable and repetitive societies', of communitas : a "model (...) of human interrelation", juxtaposed to the dominant model , the one t hat fixes places and hierarchies ; a model that is fuzzier, more egalitarian, more ephemeral too, but carrying a potentiality , and nevertheless subject to a supernatural or charismatic symbolic authority ; but also, for this very reason, an element that is i ndispensable to the dynamics of social life and yet neglected by structural approaches to societies that are both too static and too blind to the possible50 . Whereas it was reserved for the phases of individual life in undifferentiated societies, life in a state of communitas finds a broader and more lasting, though less frequent, development in periods of major historical transition in differentiated societies. Moreov er, "feelings of catastrophe and crisis are associated with what might be called an 'urgent communitas'", a form of collective bonding devoid of pressing , well-established rules of life , as was the case , in the thirteenth century, among the early Franciscans - who are of great interest to the anthropologist - and then the Joachimites , close to a part of the first , the current of spirituals , but also among the hippies confronted at least imaginatively , for Turner - who writes at the end of the 1960s, before the real emergence of ecological apocalypticism - with the hydrogen bomb51 . Why this lack of rules, this unwanted or impossible 47 Gershom Scholem, Sabbatai Tsevi. Le messie mystique 1626 -1676 , translated from the English by Marie -José Jolivet and Alexis Nouss, Lagrasse, Verdier, coll. Poche, 1983 [1957] . 48 Sigmund Freud, 'The Cleavage of the Ego in the Defence Process' (1938), in Œuvres complètes , tome XX (1937 -1938) , Paris, PUF, 2010, p. 219 -224; Octave Mannoni, 'Je sais bien mais quand même... ' (1964), Clefs pour l'Imaginaire ou l'Autre Scène , Paris, Seuil, coll. Le champ freudien, 1969.49 Jean Séguy, "Les non-conformismes religieux d'Occident", in Henri -Charles Puech (ed.), Histoire des religions, II, La formation des religions universelles et les religions de salut dans le monde méditerranéen et le Proche - Orient. Les religions constituées en Occident et leurs contre -courants , Paris, Gallimard, coll. Folio Essais, 1972, p. 1229-1303 , in particular p. 1302.50 Victor W. Turner, Le phénomène rituel. Structure et contre -structure , translated from English by Gérard Guillet, Paris, PUF, coll. Ethnologies, 1990 [1969], pp. 110 -111, 111.51 Victor W. Turner, The Ritual Phenomenon. Stru cture and Counter -Structure, op. cit. pp. 143-144. "In the history of religions, it is interesting to observe how often movements of the communitas genre develop an apocalyptic mythology, theology or ideology (...) If one is looking for the structure of cr isis or catastrophe communitas, one must find it not at the level of social interaction , but in the manner of Lévi -Strauss, in the terrifying and colourful imagery of apocalyptic myths generated in the milieu of existential communitas. There is also a char acteristic polarisation in movements of this kind between, on the one hand, a rigorous simplicity 


 12 institutionalisation? "[I]f the end of the world is predicted to come quickly," notes the anthropologist , "what is the point of legislating by developing a system of social institutions made to withstand the wear and tear of time52 ?" The study of this effect of time on apocalyptic groups actually encourages us to relativise the clear -cut opposition between the reports of failure and success established about them . The social success of disaster prophecies almost always involves the transformation of their message and a stabilised structuring of their interactions53 . And also by a certain slowing down , a cooling of the collective and mental agitation that they initially entail . The exalt ation that it provides , and of which they are also the product , cannot last forever54 . As Durkheim already pointed out in relation to situations of creative effervescence in general , this agitation is too exhausting55 . "As a 'propelling force' comparable to rockets launching satellites , these prophecies and groups can therefore , under certain conditions, prove capable of placing 'systems of thought or action in their orbit'56 . But then, they either fall back or become accultu rated in the social sphere that saw their emergence or in the political sphere. So much so that the fortunes of an apocalyptic sect may paradoxically result in its disappearance into the overall fabric of society57 . It remains perilous to apply these results as they stand to present -day ecological apocalypticism . One of the most robust theses to emerge from studies of millenarian and apocalyptic counter -religions is that the reconfiguring force of the possibilities ar ising from apocalyptic messages is not deduced from the number of its followers but from its capacity to draw up its own stable rules and to enter into a relationship with declining institutions. In order to better understand these mechanisms , it would be necessary to focus more precisely in the future on the relays and mediations of apocalyptic prophecies and the collectives that embody them, on the transformations that they undergo from the departure or death of the founders. In any case , the massive adop tion of an apocalyptic point of view is not the only source of the power of apocalypticism . and poverty in behaviour - being a naked man without conveniences - and, on the other hand, an almost feverish, visionary and prophetic poetry, which is their main mode of cultural expression ." Emphasis added by the author (pp. 148-149) . 52 Ibid, p. 144.53 "However, time and history introduce structure into their social life and legalism into their cultural production. Often what was at one time literally regarded as an imminent and universal catastrophe ends up being interpreted allegorically or mystically as the drama of the individual soul or as the spiritual destiny of the true Church on earth or as a remote event in the far future." Ibid, p. 149.54 See for example, despite the limitations of the method used, the conclusions drawn by Henri Desroche from his transhistorical and transcultural panorama of messianisms and millenarisms, "Introduction", Dieux d'hommes. Dictionnaire des messianismes et des millénarismes du 1er siècle à nos jours , Paris, Berg Internati onal, 2010 [1969], pp. 13 -57, especially pp. 48 -55. 55 Émile Durkheim, Sociologie et philosophie , Paris, PUF, 1963, p. 134 -135 quoted by Henri Desroche, Ibid, p. 49.56 Henri Desroche, Ibid. 57 One of the recent syntheses on the comparative sociology of mille narian and apocalyptic movements concludes on a similar note: "(...) apocalyptic movements can be both volatile in their trajectories and have significant consequences. In John R. Hall, "Apocalyptic and Millenarian Movements" in David A. Snow, Donatella de lla Porta, Bert Klandermans, Doug McAdam (eds.), The Wiley -Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Social and Political Movements , Oxford, Blackwell, 2013 . 


 13 Choosing your apocalypseHowever, some fear that the analogy between catastrophism and millenarianism will discredit catastrophist ecologies by making them look like irrational superstitions58 . They insist on the novelties of current apocalypticism: the secularisation of thoughts about the end of t he world from the end of the nineteenth century onwards, the substitution of natural cataclysms for divine fury, the emphasis on human responsibility for destruction. The prognosis of the end of the world has acquired an even more tangible material truth s ince the invention of the atomic bomb, from which moment onwards, in its nuclear form and then in its climatic version, it has been the object of intense calculation and rationalisation59 . The fact that humanity can be effectively destroyed in a few secon ds would introduce a major break in the long history of relations at the end of time.For Bruno Latour, too, millenarianism must be discarded, but apocalypticism remains inevitable and necessary . It must even be assumed on condition that particular theore tical care is taken to better define the type of apocalypticism that is appropriate to the current situation of the destruction of the earth. Like the German philosopher Günther Anders, but in a different historical context of enunciation, Latour invites u s to distinguish between the time of the end , marked by an uncertainty of completion, and the end of time , whose idea implies that the apocalypse has occurred. It is this last conception that, according to Latour, has animated the movement of modernity : from Joachim de Flore to the scientists of the atom or of transhumanism , via Auguste Comte and Karl Marx, we have lived entirely 'after the Apocalypse'60 . Now, to live after the apocalypse is to be certain that ancient times are definitively behind us, that the transcendence of the end of history or of the completion of progress is in history, that it is or can be realised here below. For Latour, the whole scientific, technical, progressive or revolutionary epic is mille narian without always knowing it. This is why , whatever their content or form, millenarianisms do not offer a relationship to time and the possible that is adapted to the contemporary situation of ecological catastrophe , a situation that requires a break w ith the modernist consciousness of time and history in order to live not after, but in and during the apocalypse61 . For those who have immanentized Heaven," he summarizes, "there is no longer an accessible Earth," no longer a world, and therefore a fortio ri no longer a presence in the world62 . Hence these dreams, basically symmetrical to each other, for Latour, aiming to go to Mars or to restore the forms of life of yesteryear in order to escape or to counteract the planetary apocalypse .Isn't it a case of giving up on the possible to immanentise the apocalypse, to finally become terrestrial, as the French anthropologist wishes ? It would rather be to conceive a more just idea of it by avoiding projecti ng or foreseeing , behind the reality of the apocalypse, an 58 Luc Semal, op. cit. pp. 44 -55. The author recognises, however, by relying on the vast historical fresco drawn by the historian of religions Lucian Boia, that "ecological catastrophism may indeed be only the latest avatar" of a "mobilising rhetoric" common to religious millena risms, which invokes a "radical change" that is both a bearer of "anguish" and of "hope" (p. 46). See Lucian Boia, La fin du monde. Une histoire sans fin , Paris, La Découverte, 1999.59 On the continuity between the thought of the atomic bomb and that of th e climate crisis, see in particular, in addition to the work already mentioned by Jean -Pierre Dupuy, Hicham -Stéphane Afeissa, La Fin du monde et de l'humanité. Essai de généalogie du discours écologique, Paris, PUF, 2014.60 Bruno Latour, Face à Gaïa. Huit conférences sur le nouveau régime climatique , Paris, La Découverte, coll. "Les Empêcheurs de penser en rond", 2015, p. 252.61 Bruno Latour, Face à Gaïa, op. cit. p. 281 -282.62 Ibid, p. 259. 


 14 earthly paradise or hell. But how can we ensure that this new relationship to time is established and spread? Is it not once again , in the final analysis , a matter of conversion ? Yet, more than doubt, ignorance, falsity or error , any conversion stumbles on the rock of habits and denial63 . Doesn't this explain the disturbing correlation , in times of disaster, between the apparent slowness of changes in attitude and the rapid inflation of utopian discourse ? How , under these conditions, can we evaluate or avoid nihilism, that partly irrefutable feeling in the time of the end , as Anders says, not only of not being able to do anything but above all of not having to do anything ?As we have outlined, the spectre of the end of time, of the end of the possible, does not translate, as is often envisaged at first sight , into an end of possibilities64 . The horizon of ecological catastrophe, even if it is not in the majority , and even if it is intermittent , has even given rise over the last few decades to a reopening of imaginations , scenarios and concrete possibilities in discourse and in practice, on the side of paper utopias and real utopias . Far from depoliticising society, the expectation of collapse is based on a proven pattern of mobilisation and functions, on the contrary, as an operator of collective and public commitment. 63 Günther Anders has given much thought to this problem of the 'pl asticity of feelings' and to the rare moments of their rapid evolution as under the disastrous effect of Nazi propaganda. Günther Anders, L'obsolescence de l'homme, op cit , p. 346: "[T]hose who have acquired a habit have become, at the very moment when they have intuitively become accustomed to an organisation of the world, incapable of imagining another course of events, i.e. that another organisation of the world was also possible and remai ns a possibility . In short, the 'mystification ' that habit operates consists in the fact that it eternalizes in reverse. (note 42, p. 347. Emphasis added).64 A similar observation is made by the comparative anthropology of apocalypses in Matthew Carey, 'Apocalypse in the plural. When every world has its end', Terrain , 'Apocalypses', 71, 2019, pp. 6 -25. "The end of a world," the author writes, "is always the end of the world for those who experience or conceive of it; and any end of the world, no matter how large or small, always admits the possibility of a world after." 