 1 Extracts from a chapter in Haud Guéguen, Laurent Jeanpierre, La perspective du possible , Paris, La Découverte, 2022. Relationship to the possible and ecological disaster The present era is haunted by a partly new but overwhelming possibility - that of an end of possibilities , of a probable catastrophe of planetary proportions, that of the depletion of resources or the conditions of life, that of the destruction and extinction of a myriad of species and t hen of humanity itself. This fear of the 'obsolescence of man' , of other living beings and of the planet is not new; it already circulated widely in the last century after the nuclear explosions of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the implementation of a war of a type that was unprecedented at the time and which is far from having disappeared from our present1 . Even before that, the catastrophe of destruction was experienced directly by millions of people on the occasion of th e wars of the twentieth century and the exterminations and genocides that accompanied them. The experience of a catastrophic erasure of the social world is itself common in human history, since entire societies have been either destroyed or conquered by fo rce and, as a result, profoundly transformed when they have not been annihilated . The serialization of these catastrophes, which in no way posits their equivalence, is of course debatable. For it is not indifferent , from this point of view, to imagine the loss of the natural world or the collapse of one's cultural world, even if these two threats are not mutually exclusive. The fact remains that the generality of the apocalyptic fact should in principle allow compar isons between experiences of collapse from the point of view of the possibilities that they authorise or prohibit2 . The modes of construction of the possible, the forms and contents of utopian attitudes , the post -capitalist alternative practices were historically indexed to a progressive representation of history. How are they altered by the inversion of the sign of the arrow of time? And while revolutionary or critical events tend to open up possibilities , is it any different in the longer , but limited, time of the announced catastrophe3 ? There are two opposing positions on these issues. For some, the announcement of the ecological catastrophe is necessary and positive, it is the condition for a collective and political awakening , the only way to reopen the future and change the course of things4 . For others, the time of the end risks, on the contrary, releasing the desires of immediate1 Günther Anders , The Obsolescence of Man. On the Soul in the Age of the Second Industrial Revolution , Paris, Encyclopédie des Nuisances / Ivréa, 2002 [1956]. 2 This comparative perspective was inaugurated by Ernesto de Martino , La fin du monde. Essai sur les apocalypses culturelles , translated from the Italian by Giordana Charuty, Daniel Fabre, Marcello Massenzio, Paris, Éditions de l'Ehess, coll. EHESS -Translat ions, 2016 [1977]. 3 On the relationship to time in event -based conjunctures of political rupture, see Michel Dobry , Sociologie des crises politiques. La dynamique des mobilisations multisectorielles , Paris, Presses de la Fondation nationale des sciences politiques, 1992. 4 For example in Jean -Pierre Dupuy , Pour un catastrophisme éclairé. Quand l'impossible est certain , Paris, Seuil, coll. La couleur des idées, 2002. 


 2 enjoyment, generalised desublimation and the play of egoistic impulses5 . The confrontation of the two theses is also reflected in the political order. Some people claim that the hypothesis of the end of time is depoliticising6 or that accounts of catastrophe usually lead to conservative behaviour that supports the established order or even to reactionary attitudes . Others , on the other hand, believe that the catastrophic narrative is the condition of possibility for political action and that it could even lead to a new commitment to overcoming the current socio -economic and po litical order. However, empirical tests of these prognoses are still rare. They remain necessary because the perspective of the possible consists in showing , if they exist, new and real possibilities in the face of a closed horizon that seems to be ineluctably approaching. The future of the disaster The history of what the historian Jean -Baptiste Fressoz has called the 'disinhibition' of most economic, political and scientific elites with regard to the announcement of industrial, health o r ecological risks, which are often fatal, since the end of the 18th century is better known7 . Today, it involves the formation of interest groups denouncing humanist or ecological 'fundamentalisms ' and producing doubt in the face of knowledge about risks. Nor does it exclude the maintenance of absolutist propaganda in favour of reason towards critics of the industrialisation of knowledge. It continues with forms of social and cultural secession from the rest of society, especially from those deemed too disbelieving in progress and rationalist eschatology. It ends with a pursuit of, or a rush into, scientific and technical investment to solve the problems already posed by scientific and technical inves tment. The dominant groups that use these arguments and adopt these behaviours are those who, whatever happens and in every era, have a 'happy apocalypse'. Yet, in the face of these documented phenomena, the existential consequences of the prophecy of plan etary collapse on other parts of society have remained in the shadows . In order to address them, we must begin by abandoning a value judgment on the quality or accuracy of the predictions of the future that they pronounce. For, from the perspective of the possible, it is the effects of these projections on the ways of living and relating to action that represent a privileged object of attention8 . Green Utopias A first approach to these questions is to study the visions of the future deployed by government al or critical environmentalist thought in recent decades. This is what the British sociologist Lisa Garforth has done by analysing environmental policy discourses, ecological political philosophy and speculative or science fictional literature9 in a way that is probably still too indistinct. Her thesis, based on a survey of English -language discourses , is that the5 A brilliant illustration of this view is found in Pierre -Henri Castel , Le Mal qui vient. Essai hâtif sur la fin des temps , Paris, Éditions du Cerf, 2018. 6 Several critiques of different kinds can be found in Michaël Foessel, Après la fin du monde. Critique de la raison apocalyptique , Paris, Seuil, L'ordre philosophique, 2012; Renaud Garcia, La collapsologie ou l'écologie mutilée , Montreuil, L'Échappée, 2020 ; Catherine Larrère, Raphaël Larrère, Le pire n'est pas certain : essai sur l'aveuglement catastrophiste , Paris, Premier Parallèle, 2020. 7 Jean -Baptiste Fressoz, L'apocalypse joyeuse. Une histoire du risque technologique , Paris, Seuil, coll. Univers historique, 2012. 8 Arnaud Esquerre , 'Ce que vaut la fin du monde', in Emma Aubin -Boltanski, Claudine Gauthier (eds.), Penser la fin du monde , Paris, CNRS Éditions, 2014, pp. 425 -448. And also Arnaud Esquerre, 'L'inconsistante prédiction selon laquelle le mont Bugarach sera sauvé de la fin du monde', Raisons politiques , vol. 48, n° 4, 2012, p. 33 -49. 9 Lisa Garforth, Green Utopias. Environmental Hope Before and After Nature , Cambridge, Polity, 2018, p. 5. 


 3 ecological consciousness of ruling elites initially revolved around the figures of the crisis before the hypothesis of collapse cause d a reversal , with institutional discourses becoming , since the end of the 1980s, predominantly marked by a new hope and the display of a desire to act10 . This movement from apocalypse to utopia began with what recent history has remembered as the Meadows Report on the limits to growth published in 1972 after being commissioned by the Club of Rome , a report that inaugurated the establishment of an apocalyptic horizon on the scale of a wider public opinion . The publication in 1987 of the Brundtland Report ( Our Common Future ), commissioned by the United Nations , opened a new phase marked by the official discourse of 'sustainable development '. The talk of planetary 'limits ' and their mortal overshoot was replaced by an appreciation of the 'thresholds ' of irreversibility in terms of resource destruction. The 1992 Rio Summit confirmed the institutionalisation of this new ecological political hope at the highest international le vel. Then, from the global to the local level, it was translated into the adoption of a shared political agenda for the first decades of the 21st century. What have been the responses of organised civil society and intellectuals to this shift among climat e and environmental policy experts from a predominantly negative to a more optimistic view? Deep ecology , developed in the 1970s, can be read as a radical and immediate response to the discourse on limits and a radical critique of the effects on nature of the instrumental values of Western modernity and its technocracy11 . It is a question , as with the Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess, of going beyond traditional humanism in the direction of an 'ecocentrism' , or of politicising everyday life and subsistence, as in the ecofeminism that was developing at the same time12 . Other theoretical and activist reactions call for a rewilding of human societies. The practical and sometimes political variations of the reaction to the discourse of the Club of Rome include the defence of small scales of ecological action or the transformation of lifestyles , of which the bio -regionalist utopias - starting w ith Kirkpatrick Sale - or the communalist utopias - with Murray Bookchin - are, in a way, derivatives . In all this theoretical and utopian renewal, Lisa Garforth points to the importance of the moral dimension , which is expressed in the choice of a worldview and an adequate form of life . Secondly, the discourse of sustainable development in turn leads to other 'green utopias' , visible in institutional prose , but also in fictional writing as shown in some of th e novels of Kim Stanley Robinson ( Pacific Edge , 1990) or Ursula Le Guin ( Always Coming Home , 1986) of ideal, modest , harmonious and technologically supported societies , which Garforth interprets as belonging to this 'new utopian spirit ', which we have already discussed in the way the French philosopher Miguel Abensour historicised the most contemporary utopianism13 : they are anti-anti-utopian and above all heuristic utopias , methods of denaturalising the present rather than positive plans ; they offer instruments for reading what separates present reality from a life that could be acceptable again , at the antipodes of the existences of the consumer society. 10 Lisa Garforth, Green Utopias, op. cit , 26-49. 11 Ibid, pp. 50-71. 12 Amidst many recent publications, one should consult in particular Émilie Hache (ed.), Reclaim. Recueil de textes écoféministes , translated from English by Émile Noteris, Paris, Cambourakis, 2016 . For a bibliography and perspective on the ecofeminism of su bsistence, see Geneviève Pruvost, Quotidien politique. Féminisme, écologie, subsistance , Paris, La Découverte, 2021, in particular pp. 363 -364. 13 Lisa Garforth, op. cit. p. 77f. 


 4 A new breakthrough came in the 2000s : for some, the limits of sustainable developmen t policies became glaringly obvious and the seriousness of environmental crises became both more visible and better assessed . The publication of the fourth report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 2007 was a turning point14 . It is no longer a question of building a 'sustainable ' life but of 'adapting ' to climate change. The future, and with it the possib ilities, are narrowed and fewer in number than in the previous period. In the discourses that Lisa Garforth examines, the enunciation is in some ways below the future but also beyond nature: catastrophe is imminent or the terminal experience of human life is already underway. The ecological critique has been neutralised by institutions that have made the crisis an ordinary and permanent reality. Utopian discourse is in decline . Dystopias and post -apocalyptic fictions are taking their place - Margaret Atwood 's Year of the Flood (2009) , Kim Stanley Robinson's Science in Capital trilogy (2004 -2007) , Paolo Bacigalupi's The Water Knife (2015) - as the mainspring of the imagination in order to overcome the pessimism that dominates ecopolitics . The new idea of an immanent , rather than an imminent, apocalypse testifies to a new montage of ecological thought and praxis15 . In recent years, a new debate has further changed the configuration of these discourses. The question has been raised whether nature has in fact disappeared - as in Bill McKibben's The End of Nature (1989) - or whether , as Bruno Latour and many of those who follow or complement his proposals argue , it is not his concept and the dualisms it imposes, with culture in particular, that should be discarded16 . The result has been what Garforth calls 'post -natural ' thinking about ways to cultivate sharper perceptions of non -human realities (animals, plants, minerals) , to draw on non-dualistic cosmologies and to build forms of collective life that are regulated by them17 . Such thought experiments renew the speculative fictions of the present and future and , for the time being, according to Garforth, overcome the 'no future' that dominated the previous phase. If we stick to the imaginations of the apocalypse, it is therefore excessive to diagnose an end of possibilities. On the contrary, the retreat of the ideology of progress and the eschatological hy pothesis of the end of time multiply the relationships to the future and the forms of projection. Far from withering away because of the parties and technocracy, as Mannheim predicted, the utopian attitude would even rise from its ashes by espousing the ecological cause and acting as a revealer of current blockages , without necessarily providing a clear or univocal picture of the desirable future . The discursive formations identified by Lisa Garforth coexist rather than supplant each other: the apocalyptic possibility rubs shoulders with neo -naturalist, durabilist and post -naturalist possibilities. A more diachronic focus also shows the constant back -and-forth between pessimistic and optimistic orientations. As in other historical periods, the possible remains a front, its figures all the more fragmented as nature has become the object of more and more anticipations, as it has never only interested utopians or ecological activists but, increasingly, bureaucrac ies, scientific expertise , insurance and financial industries18 . But can we stick to this picture of a14 Ibid, p. 102-106 15 Ibid, p. 112-116 16 Ibid, pp. 127-154. 17 To this last corpus could be added Anna Lowenhaput Tsing, The Mushroom of the End of the World. On the possibility of living in the ruins of capitalism , Paris, La Découverte, 2017. 18 On the relationship of finance, insurance and the military to ecological catastrophe, see Razmig Keucheyan , La nature est un champ de bataille. Essai d'écologie politique , Paris, Zones, 2014. A general way of approaching the new configuration of relations to the future, where more or less rational catastrophism and apocalyptic 


 5 new struggle for the legitimate definition of the possible? By remaining focused on texts, Lisa Garforth's analysis barely touches on their reception, t heir uses, and the echoes they encounter in other social spheres. However, the green and paper utopias that have been disseminated since the 1970s are also reflected or found in a wide variety of lived experiences. Disaster activists Among these, on the side of environmental mobilisations, there are the experiments associated with the general idea of degrowth or the transitional cities movement19 . They can be seen as practical outlets for the discourses identified by Lisa Garforth in the last phase of green utopianism. Rather than a sudden recession, we might as well move towards a chosen slowdown, say its protagonists. After brainstorming new kinds of energy descent plans in Ireland, permaculture professor Rob Hopkins is setting up a network of cities open to rapid transition in Totnes, England . It was a politically conservative township of about 8,500 people, with a fairly affluent population , a thriving ecological minority and a hippie pilgrimage that had been going on for several years. In his study of them, the political scientist Luc Semal shows that the transition activists present themselves as apolitical or rather apartisan. In their analysis of the ecological catastrophe, t hey also tend to euphemise or even ignore the power relations that are at the root of the phenomena they describe. The prevailing approach, in their relationship to the future, is above all psychological and technical. They provide emotional support to the distraught spectators after the screening of the films they project on peak oil - the irreversible contraction of oil production - and its expected effects. They set up energy workshops, shared gardening and farming practices , local currencies and farmers ' markets, renewable electricity from solar panels and windmills. They add festive rituals that are supposed to develop a certain optimism in the midst of the doomsday message. The political content of the catastrophism shared by these activists varies according to generation. The apocalyptic hypothesis does not function as a traditional politicization trigger for the oldest among the ecologists who have already experienced several defeats in the movemen t20 . For younger people, on the other hand, the moral and emotional shock of the catastrophic perspective often acts as a political trigger. The scientific data on global warming or the extinction of species are still insufficient to trigger an existentia l or collective commitment21 . The emotional dimension, counterfactual narratives , and testimonies of a time without carbon or oil are therefore indispensable components of catastrophist mobilisation processes. The last important and unavoidable parameter in the circles where Semal and those who study similar activists navigate is despair , of which the philosopher Günther Anders also spoke, and its more or less regular waves , with which it is impossible not to count22 .prophecy represent only some of the options among other forms of relation to the possible as well as ways of linking an ticipation of the future and present action, is presented by Francis Chateauraynaud, Josquin Debaz, Aux bords de l'irréversible : sociologie pragmatique des transformations , Paris, Pétra, coll. " Pragmatismes ", 2017. 19 Luc Semal, Face à l'effondrement. Mi liter à l'ombre des catastrophes , Paris, PUF, coll. "L'écologie en questions", 2019. 20 Luc Semal, Face à l'effondrement, op. cit , p. 206-222 21 Ibid, pp. 223-276. 22 Günther Anders, And if I am desperate, what do you want me to do about it, Paris, Allia, 2001. 


 6 Desperate or, at least, disillusioned : this is how the collapsologists or collapsonauts feel, these catastrophist ecologists who study the collapse of the current thermo -industrial civilisation in all its aspects and talk about it in groups on electronic forums or in meeting rooms. In France, their name and practice took off in 2015 with the publication of Pablo Servigne's books and with the public pronouncements of the former elected environment alist Yves Cochet, who a few years earlier founded a "collapseist " think tank, the Momentum Institute , whose mission is to " organise the transition to a post -crash, post - fossil fuel, climate -modified world" and to think of "emergency exits" from an "energy , economic and ecological crisis"23 . The "collapsologists " explicitly situate their vision after the previous environmentalist waves, they start from the limits of the collective action of the degrowth and transition city movements since 2005. This is why they call for the hypothesis of a collapse without rest : in order to "anticipate the decline", "avoid too much degradation" and exchange sc ientific information and, above all, technical skills and know -how24 . In some of these groups , which Cyprien Tasset has studied in France , he has observed, in the midst of permaculture specialists and resilience fundamentalists, a predominance of men and, among them, the presence of former engineers, branching executives , small entrepreneurs and coaches. He suggests that the catastrophist perspective is becoming less and les s marginal , that it has broadened its social and geographical bases in recent years25 . He also shows that the collectives of collapsologists serve, for their members, to overcome their feeling of powerlessness and isolation , that they support constraining individual paths of learning and self -education, in the way , perhaps, that the workers' meetings or newspapers of the 1830s and 1840s in Fran ce served as places for the formation of an autonomous workers' political discourse26 . In another utopian and sociological space , Danish anthropologist Stine Kroijer has also described the mobilising force of global warming dystopias among radical environmental activists who , since 2012, have been living in an occupied forest to fight the exploitation of lignite ('brown coal') from the Hambach mine, the largest open -cast excavation in Eu rope27 . Several of the activists in the forest say they were attracted by the relatively high level of activity in the occupied area compared to what they knew in their home town. As one resident put it, "the system is in denial " while " great civilisation s have always had to face their own demise28 . The evocation of the ecological catastrophe brings these activists together, it also allows them to legitimise illegal actions of ecological sabotage and to distance themselves from or even cease all relations with individuals or groups deemed23 Pablo Servigne, Raphaël Stevens . How everything can collapse. Petit manuel de collapsologie à l'usage des générations présentes , Paris , Seuil , 2015. 24 Cyprien Tasset, "Les 'effondrés anonymes '? S'associer autour d'un constat de dépassement des limites planétaires', La Pensée écologique , n° 3, 2019 , p. 53 -62. See also, Anne Rumin, 'Thinking the political scope of collapsology on the ground', Momentum Institute , 3 June 2021. URL: https: //www.institutmomentum.org/penser -la-portee -politique -de-la-collapsologie -sur-le-terrain/ 25 Anne de Rugy , 'Wanting downgrading? De la critique des hiérarchies professionnelles à la critique de l'ordre économique' , Politiques de Communication , 11, 2018, pp . 125-157. 26 Jacques Rancière, La Nuit des prolétaires . Archives du rêve ouvrier , Paris, Fayard, 1981. 27 Stine Kroijer, 'Civilization as the Undesired World. Radical Environmentalism and the Uses of Dystopia in Times of Climate Crisis', Social Analysis , vol. 64, issue 3, Autumn 2020, pp. 48 -67; Stine Kroijer, Mike Kollöffel, 'Mining Life. A German coal mining region', Terrain , 'Apocalypses', 71, 2019, pp. 104 -115. 28 Stine Kroijer, "Civilization as the Undesired World. Radical Environmentalism and the Uses of Dystopia in Times of Climate Crisis", art. cit. p. 60. 


 7 corrupt with the world, such as the police force, the mine's security personnel, and the employees of the electricity company that operates it. Regular, often violent, confrontations with these other groups took place in order to bind the collective together and to remind them of the harmful nature of the dominant forms of life adjusted to capitalism . In contrast, the tree houses built by the fore st occupants offer a space of reclusion and peace. Interactions with the outside world are, however, inevitable. Regularly, inhabitants of the autonomous zone get water from people who support their struggle in the nearest small town . They also glean from supermarket bins and bring back day-old bread donated by bakeries. When they return to the collective camp in the forest, those who have gone to "civilisation" are looked upon with disdain, they do not have access to the collective vegetarian kitchen that has been set up in the middle of the huts . The anecdote indicates that the time of the end of time is put into space as a territorial struggle between the forces of good and the powers of evil29 . The feeling of apocalypse is not reserved for the inhabitants of the forest, however. Before their arrival, the inhabitants of the villages had to leave one after the other, if they were not expropriated , so that mining could be carried out . Their world too has already ended or been lost30 . Among the activists, it is not only the end of the middle -class consumerist civilisation that is evoked : they also know that the struggle agains t the miners will end sooner or later . Some of these German environmental and anti -coal protesters gradually turned to indigenous knowledge from Latin America. Over time, the occupation became not only a mobilisation of opposition but a collective experimentation with sustainable forms of living and learning of so-called 'primitive' skills31 . Indigenous peoples and the anthropological narratives that record their practices are shaping models of societies with a closer relationship to nature . Several activists have given up their first names for names of animals or natural elements related to forest life. Afternoons in the camp are devoted to voluntary "enslavement " activiti es through the collective acquisition of ancestral skills attributed to the Indians of the Americas . Communications are established with North American Indian struggles such as the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation against a pipeline in the state of Dakota, or the village of Sarayacu in Ecuador against an oil field. Some activists refer to the Brazilian anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro . Soon , 'we will all be Amerindians', he wrote, since these peoples experienced the end of the world more than five centuries ago and learned to live under these circumstances32 . New perceptions of non -humans, new cosmologies, de -centring from anthropocentrism: the practices of the German anti -coal mining activists and th eir world , but also of the Zads, are inspired by the post -natural utopian discourses that Lisa Garforth identified in her textual investigation33 . The few studies currently available therefore point to the great diversity of the effects of the announcemen t of an energy and ecological catastrophe on relationships to possibility, action and politics . There is no single end of time : depending on the groups, the periods, the ideas29 Ibid, p. 56. 30 Stine Kroijer, Mike Kollöffel, "Miner la vie. A German coal mining region", art. cit . pp. 108-109. 31 Stine Kroijer, "Civilization as the Undesired World. Radical Environmentalism and the Uses of Dystopia in Times of Climate Crisis", art. cit . p. 58. 32 Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, 'Who is Afraid of the Ontological Wolf? Some Comments on an Ongoing Anthropological Debate', Cambridge Journal of Anthropology , 33, 2015, p. 6. 33 See, for example, Barbara Glowczekski, Réveiller les esprits de la terre , Bellevaux, Deho rs, 2021; Margot Verdier, Le commun de l'autonomie. Une sociologie anarchiste de la zad de Notre -Dame -des-Landes , Vulaines sur Seine, Éditions du Croquant, 2021 . 


 8 that circulate, it is affected by varying degrees of real possibility and temporal proximity. Similarly, the time of the end is invested in a variable manner. But for those who already feel its foreseeable advent, the catastrophic probability does not lead to automatic apathy. Between those who resign themselves and those who prepare themselves, a whole spectrum of behaviour coexists . Surveys of catastrophic environments also emphasise the importance of collective mediation - on social networks, through associations, long -term occupations, places of exchange and sharing - in the transition to action and the formulation of new possibilities that a purely psychological interpretation of the fear of seeing the species or the planet disappear does not allow to grasp . In order to be understood, the politicisation of apocalypticists must be considered in a broader sense, beyond electoral , partisan and even associative commitments34 . Of course, not all catastrophists have an enemy , nor do they conceive of alliances . But without conflict, can we really talk about politics? What will be left of the politicisation of daily life or activity, of the construction of an exemplary way of life in the face of the uninhibited enjoyment of at least a fraction of the dominant groups and large companies? Faced with phenomena in progress that are inventing their modes of enunciation and action, these questions do not require clear -cut answers . They will have to be examined sooner or later with sufficient historical hindsight. This is because the time of the end is not brief , it is a dilated time that does not have the same texture as that of critical events. While it is dazzling on the scale of geological eras , it passes slo wly for humans and does not materialise in a synchronisation of experienced times as is the case in large -scale crises: some perceive it, others are indifferent to it. This has been the case throughout the long history of millenarian movements in all religions. Apocalypse Now How can we not interpret the apocalyptic ecological visions of the present as forms of rebirth of chiliasm? Do not the militants of catastrophe aim , like Thomas Münzer and his disciples five centuries ago, at a full presence in the world, a higher awareness of the elements and of dependencies, a conversion of everyday life into a sensitive and even sensual experience? Do they not seek to prefigure here and now a world after the last judg ement , subsequent to the verdict of historical times ? Comparing apocalypses The thesis of an 'elective affinity' between ecological apocalypticism and religious apocalypticism, particularly Christian apocalypticism, was already proposed at the end of the 1970s on the basis of the study of a few neo -rural communities in France35 . Bertrand Hervieu and Danièle Hervieu -Léger noted that some 'ultra -minority' neo -ruralists adopted an apocalyptic vision of the world , particularly when they had not been able to integrate into34 Sophie Duchesne, Florence Haegel , "The politicisation of discussions, at the intersection of logics de spécialisation et de conflictualisation", Revue française de science politique , Vol. 54, n° 6, 2004, p. 877 -909; Camille Hamidi, "Éléments pour une approche interactionniste de la polit isation. Engagement associatif et rapport au politique dans des associations locales issues de l'immigration", Revue française de science Politique , Vol. 56, No. 1, 2006, p. 5 -25; Julien Weisbein , "Towards a research agenda on ordinary politicizations with in French political sociology? À propos de L'ordinaire du politique : enquêtes sur les rapports profanes au politique , directed by François Buton, Patrick Lehingue, Nicolas Mariot and Sabine Rozier', Politix , Vol. 119, No. 3, 2017, pp. 147 -160. 35 Danièle Léger, "Apocalyptique écologique et 'retour' de la religion", Archives des sciences sociales des religions , 53, 1982, p. 49 -67. 


 9 local societies or had encountered insurmountable difficulties in surviving with their communities. These existential activists were already anticipating the inevitable catastrophe of civilisation . They attributed the main source to the Promethean ambition of the human species and its 'pride' in nature36 . A new element compared to traditional apocalypticism was that the sciences , especially economics and environmental knowledge , were part of this 'awareness (...) of the imminence of a judgement' . But the feeling of the near closure of possibilities was nevertheless extended into a 'problematic of salvation '. "All will perish in the catastrophe, except for the few who will have understood befo re the others the urgency of the times and will have been able to prepare and arm themselves to get through the final drama . The image of the general collapse is followed by the image of a new world, a new age in which the people of the saved will be able to live in peace and harmony37 . In order for nature to prevail over industrial society, two paths were promoted or taken that are still taken today : that of "simplified life" around an open house, for which Henry David Thoreau set the general model in Walden ; and that of a return to traditional agricultural life, for which paradigmatic examples can be drawn from several eras and all continents. The catastrophic observation open s up many previously unknown doors, as evidenced by the 'technical possibilities' adapted to the new life that apocalypticists seize upon, such as self- building , solar energy, water harvesting and many other skills38 . For Léger, there is above all a formal convergence between the representations of time adopted by apocalyptic ecologists and religious eschatology , in particular Joachimism39 . The world of ecologists who have left the metropolises is a threatened universe , certainly, but also "at the dawn of a new era", a new age, which is first and foremost a time when a spirit , perceptions and ways of feeling will be cultivated that a minority of individuals will have to embody and will be able to maintain in order to attract to themselves , "like a magnet" , those who look at them and live alongside them40 . Another convergence between religious apocalypticism and ecological catastrophism is sociological. In the Middle Ages, as today, this type of discourse prim arily mobilises groups that are relatively privileged culturally 'but socially, economically and/or politically disqualified'41 . For Léger, apocalyptic utopianism serves above all as a 'compensatory strategy' for individuals who are unable to find their place in the space of possible occupations of their time or in the territorialized space of the36 Danièle Léger, art. cit. pp. 49 -51. 37 Ibid, p. 51. 38 Ibid, note 14, p. 65. 39 Some would qualify this parallelism by distinguishing , even if only within Christianity, the different relationships to time constructed by recent eschatologies, such as that of liberation theology in the last century in Latin America, with those implied by Anabaptist , Joachimist, Augustinian or primo -Christian eschatologies, as in Claude Dubar, 'La fin des temps : millénarisme chrétien et tem poralités', Temporalités , 'Utopies/Uchronies', 12, 2010. URL: http://journals.openedition.org/temporalites/1422 ; DOI: https://doi.org/10.4000/temporalites.1422 40 Danièle Léger, art. cit . pp. 54 -55. Of course, other religious elements - neo-paganism and non -Christian cosmologies of all kinds - could be associated with the catastrophist hypothesis. Although more powerful today, they were already identified in the 1970s within ecological apocalypticism , as some were already accusing Judeo -Christianity of ontological and historical complicity with Western imperialism and anthropocentrism, and thus, ultimately, with catastrophe. Ibid, note 39, p. 67. A classic conception of Christianity's responsibility f or the ecological crisis can be found in Lynn White, 'Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis', Science , Vol. 155, n] 3767, pp. 1203 -1207. 41 Ibid, p. 55. 


 10 concrete utopia in which they were engaged. The discourse of imminent closure of the possible is not only distinctive or restorative , it also has the function of sublimating the more immediate experience of difficult 'survival' in hostile terrain , with the effects of closure and discouragement that it inevitably produces. In the long run and on the scale of civilisations , discourses of the last ends and apocalyptic prophecies have not always mobilised only disinherited sub -proletarians or unclassifiable declassed people but also powerful personalities . Some scholars point out that Christopher Columbus, for example, was one of them, having been influenced by the writings of Joachim de Flore for his conquest operations. As soon as broad comparisons are made between millenarian or apocalyptic currents, it becomes clear that adherence to eschatology is a social fact that is part ly independent of a social position given once and for all . It is also a neglected historical factor of significant cultural and social change . As a rhetorical scheme, the discourse of the end times engages , by construction, a new action and even a certain practical 'effervescence'42 . This recent vision of the phenomenon is opposed to the privative conceptions , which have long dominated, of religious or cultural apocalypticism as a feeling of loss - in De Martino, for example - or as a factor of powerlessness . In the conclusions of his overview of medieval millenarisms , the historian of religions Norman Cohn tried to indicate some of the social and political conditions favourable to their transformative capacity43 . For millenarianisms to spread in society, a real catastrophic background is already necessary, such as the Black Death (1346 -1353), which was the greatest chiliastic outbreak in European history44 . Equally necessary : the loss of certainty in the governing bodies of bodies and souls. Ascetic groups and prophets flourish all the more when the Church is weak or corrupt , when monarchies are insecure , when their legitimacy is in decline. Apocalypticism fl ourishes , in other words, when institutions disintegrate. But all these elements are insufficient. To this must be added the triggering element of a wave of revolt which often brings forth one or more prophets, generally from the frustrated or downtrodden intelligentsia. Apocalyptic legacy The legacy , the social and political impact of the millenarian or apocalyptic currents in history remains in reality very difficult to appreciate. First of all, there is the immense sum of failed apocalypticisms which, li ke failed messianisms, have received little attention45 . But it is also necessary to integrate a compensatory force of this massive and often infantile mortality of apocalyptic groups : the mechanism , identified empirically by the social psychologist Leon Festinger and his team, of reinforcing beliefs in the end of the world or the advent of a messiah when the announcements they conveyed were invalidated by the facts46 . Sabbatatism, after the apostasy of Tsevi, the Jewish my stical messiah, in 1666 ,42 Emma Aubin -Boltanski, Claudine Gauthier (eds.), Penser la fin du monde , Paris, CNRS Éditions, 2014. 43 In order to appreciate its interest, it is necessary to get rid of its normative vision of the phenomenon, marked in particular by the anti-totalitarian spirit of the Cold War, which makes these religious movements precursor s of communist and Nazi ideologies. Norman Cohn, The Fanatics of the Apocalypse. Courants millénaristes révolutionnaires du XIè au XVIè siècle avec une postface sur le XXè siècle , Paris, Julliard, 1962 [1957]. 44 Norman Cohn, The Fanatics of the Apocalypse, op. cit. p. 302. 45 Roger Bastide, "Le messianisme raté", Archives des sciences sociales des religions , 5, 1958, p. 31 -37. 46 Leon Festinger, Henry W. Riecken, Stanley Schachter, When Prophecy Fails. An Account of a Modern Group that Predicted the Destruction of the World, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1956. 