63 play at a crucial point, on the basis of which he develops his theory of  social  order. All of this, even the notion of different systems, was already present in  embryonic form in the multi-authored Toward a General Theory of Action . However, Parsons’ ideas in this regard only took on the form of a  genuine  intellectual project with his second major work, which was published in the  same year and which bore the revealing title of The Social System. Here, Pa rsons  advocates the thesis that a general theory of action and order must pay atten - tion to all three systems, but that different disciplines or subdisciplines would focus on different aspects. While the task of analysing the  ‘cultural system’  would fall mainly to the sociology of knowledge (and perhaps to philosophy,  theology, etc.), and it would be up to psychology to examine the personality system, sociology was to deal primarily with the ‘social system’. The theoret - ical problems and empirical phenomena that emerge within this ‘social  system’  were to be the main object of sociology. But of course we can discover something about the object of sociology only  if we inquire into what, in concrete terms, a ‘social system’ actually is; so far,  Parsons has given us no more than a very abstract definition, merely telling us something about how this system differs from the two other systems. Parsons thus first underlines that society is the epitome of the ‘social system’: A social system … which meets all the essential functional prerequisites  of long term persistence from within its own resources, will be called a society . It is not essential to the concept of a society that it should not be  in any way empirically interdependent with other societies, but only that it should contain all the structural and functional fundamentals of an independently subsisting system.  (The Social System , p. 19) on this view, society is thus the fundamentally independent, self-contained  social system, which at the same time always contains within it a number,  undetermined here, of other social systems as well, that is, less extensive but nonetheless ordered relations of action between individuals (such as  insti - tutions, groups, families, etc.). The idea is that groups, families, etc. are also social systems, though not as self-sufficient as ‘society’, which also means that these smaller systems are interwoven in one way or another with ‘society’ as the largest social system. Parsons underlines that the first essential is to analyse the statics  of social  systems very generally, that is, to determine the elements of which a ‘social sys - tem’ consists, before we can move on to investigate dynamics , that is, how and  by what means social systems change. This emphasis on the statics of social systems leads immediately to the idea of ‘functional prerequisites’, the condi- tions which must pertain for a system of action , in this case the ‘social system’,  to exist over the long term:


64 First, a social system cannot be so structured as to be radically incom - patible with the conditions of functioning of its component individual  actors as biological organisms and personalities, or of the relatively stable  integration of a cultural system. Secondly, in turn the social system, on  both fronts, depends on the requisite minimum of ‘support’ from each of the other systems. It must, that is, have a sufficient accordance with the requirements of its  role system, positively in the fulfillment of expecta - tions and negatively in abstention from too much disruptive, i.e., devi - ant, behavior. It must on the other hand avoid commitment to cultural patterns which either fail to define a minimum of order or which place impossible demands on people and thereby generate deviance and con - flict to a degree which is incompatible with the minimum conditions of  stability or orderly development.  (ibid., pp. 27–8) While you may not have understood every word of this, it should be clear  that Parsons refers to a functioning ‘social system’ if a certain stability and relative absence of conflict pertains; but this is the case only if the personality systems of the parties to interaction within the social system have developed sufficient motivation to ‘play along with’ this ‘social system’, and if the cul - tural system is able to provide  values and  symbols in such a way as to ensure  that the parties to interaction within the ‘social system’, get along together in an ordered way. The interpenetration of the social and personality system   or of the social and cultural system  is thus the minimal prerequisite for the  existence of a ‘social system’. Furthermore, Parsons adds that every social system must of course deal effectively with its allocation problems (alloca - tion = the distribution of goods; the term refers to the fact that every system needs material resources in one way or another) and differentiate its internal tasks ( Toward a General Theory of Action , p. 25). The family in a modern  society thus requires both money and some way of organizing the  division  of labour between the family members if it is to survive over the long term without facing difficulties. Turning to the question of what the elements  of social systems might be, it  comes as no surprise that Parsons identifies the individual action and the actor (the latter may also be a group or collectivity). But he also refers to another ele - ment, one which has cropped up already in the above quotation, namely the ‘social role’: We have, then, three different units of social systems referable to the indi - vidual actor ranging from the most elementary to the most composite.  The first is the  social act, performed by an actor and oriented to one or  more actors as objects. The second is the status-role as the organized sub-systems of acts of the actor or actors occupying given reciprocal statuses and acting toward each other in terms of given reciprocal orientations. The third is the actor himself as a social unit, the organized system of all 


65 the statuses and roles referable to him as a social object and as the ‘author’  of a system of role-activities.  (The Social System , p. 26) The reason why social roles or status-roles became so important to Parsons  is linked with the problem of order  with which you will now be more than  familiar. This emerges whenever the actions carried out by a number of actors occur with reference to one another: how do actors manage to act in concert in the first place? This is in fact highly problematic and anything but self-evident from the analytic perspective of the social scientist, despite the fact that it is no real problem in everyday life. As is well known, Parsons’ response was to refer to values and  norms. But these must first be specified, translated  into clear  rules and anchored in  institutions, if communication and cooperative action  are not ultimately to come to grief. Values must be given concrete form by means of institutions  , that is,  institutionalized  – and this is where the concept  of roles enters the equation, one of the core concepts in the sociology of the  1950s and 1960s. roles are behavioural patterns, clusters of regulations gov - erning how to act, which I normally uphold on my own account, which I am required to uphold and which I also want to uphold. My fellow human beings also expect me to do so, so that if I disappoint their expectations by failing to act correctly, I run the risk of having sanctions imposed upon me in the shape of punishment, contempt, etc. In relation to interaction, roles – because they interpret values – ensure that people successfully  coordinate their actions. It is only by virtue of  internalization of institutionalized   values that a  genuine motivational integration of behavior in the social structure  takes place, that the deeper ‘layers’ of motivation become harnessed to  the fulfillment of role-expectation. It is only when this has taken place to  a high degree that it is possible to say that a social system is highly inte - grated, and that the interests of the collectivity and the private interests  of its constituent members can be said to approach coincidence.  (ibid., p. 42) The concept of role was crucial to Parsons’ theory building during this period  in two respects. First, placing this concept centre stage endowed sociology with a clear-cut identity. This allowed Parsons to continue what he had already tried to do, in Structure  among other writings, that is, distinguish sociology  clearly from other disciplines. It was because he considered the concept of role so important to the analysis of ‘social systems’ that he was able to argue that the social cannot be derived from nature; Parsons thus distances himself from biology. But this was not enough. Parsons’ concept of role also allows him to point out that the social cannot be derived directly from culture either (this was his way of distancing sociology from the cultural sciences and to some extent from cultural anthropology), let alone from the mere aggregation of 


66 individual acts (this was intended to counter the claims of psychology). The  concept of role was an excellent means of demonstrating the independence of the social and thus the necessity of the discipline of sociology. Second, the concept of role embodies the ideas most fundamental to  Parsonian  ‘normativist functionalism’. on the one hand, roles are  norms  and values  made specific; on the other, they meet the functional needs of the  system: roles are, from the point of view of the functioning of the social system,  the primary mechanisms through which the essential functional prereq - uisites of the system are met.  (The Social System , p. 115) The concept of role is an elegant means of illustrating how and by whom spe - cific ‘tasks’ within a social system are performed, such as the contribution  of the role of mother or father to the functioning of the social system   of the  family. What functions are performed by ‘comedians’ or ‘outsiders’ in a class of schoolchildren or small group? Have the roles of politicians in modern media-saturated societies changed and if so why? How exactly is the role of the chief executive of a major corporation defined, what is her function within it? It was a seemingly straightforward matter to broach all these issues through the concept of role, within a coherent theoretical framework. Parsons himself surely did not understand his ‘role theory’ to mean that actors  have no choice but to ‘reel off’ their roles more or less automatically  without making  any personal contribution. At certain points in his oeuvre he stated unequivocally  that as well as behaving in conformity with norms,   individuals may of course also  feel a deep sense of alienation towards the system just as they may deal creatively  with role expectations or change how they deal with them from one situation to the next ( Toward a General Theory of Action , p. 24). And some of his colleagues,  such as robert Merton, to whom we referred earlier, highlighted the fact that there  are inevitably conflicts and contradictions within and between the roles played by individuals, which may be of particular relevance to a theory of  social change. But  in Parsons’ work the analytical spotlight was always on the prerequisites for the maintenance  of systems – which also explains the distrust felt towards Parsonian  thought within the social movements of the 1960s and 1970s; the critical ques - tions which these raised, after all, related primarily to the potential for overcoming    existing systems. The concept of role, meanwhile, is mainly suited to describing  the functioning of existing  structures. Parsons rarely mentioned system change.  It is generally striking that at this stage Parsons had dealt almost exclusively with  social action and  social order in his theoretical work. The analysis, at least as  important to sociology, of social change  was for long marginal to his thinking. We  will return to this issue in the next lecture. In any event, with this  structural-functionalist theory, Parsons managed to  lay most of the foundations of empirical research practice within sociology as it 


67 then was. We would like to discuss this briefly at the end of the present lecture.  For sociologists, and not only for Parsonians, Parsons’  functionalism became  the point of departure for an extensive programme of empirical research which focused on two key subject areas in particular – areas which Parsons had himself prefigured; The Social System  included a chapter on learning roles  or socialization and another on deviant behaviour. And Parsons’ work did in fact provide socialization research with tremendous impetus. This in turn must be understood against the background of a sociology keen to assert itself; research on the learning of social roles  was a good way of achieving that clear  distinction between sociology and the disciplines of biology and psychology. Particularly with regard to the latter, it is evident that socialization research is concerned with a different set of themes than developmental psychology. The focus of attention here is not the development of the child’s moral and cogni - tive capacities, which follows its own inherent logic, but rather how the indi - vidual comes to fit into a social order – a process, moreover, whose completion does not coincide with the end of childhood but which is and which must be gone through repeatedly and into one’s later years. The other thematic focus of attention was entirely at variance with the first:  criminal sociology or the ‘sociology of deviant behaviour’ explores the cir - cumstances which lead to the failure  to  internalize  values among some indi - viduals, or why the  institutionalization of values in certain spheres of society  fails to occur to a sufficient degree and deviant behaviour, i.e., behaviour that clashes with  norms, occurs as a result. Parsons’ theory exercised a major influ - ence here as it was a first-class means of providing a theoretical structure for the field of research concerned with so-called deviant behaviour. However, it is important to avoid a potential misunderstanding here. Parsons and the sociologists working in his tradition merely claimed that social orders are held together by values  and norms  and that deviations from these are an issue in  one way or another in every order – they may be punished severely, scoffed at or merely remarked upon with a shake of the head. Parsons and his col - leagues did not mean that deviance ought  to be punished. Though critics of  the Parsonian research programme sometimes suggest otherwise, the func - tionalist theory of deviant behaviour was an attempt to describe and (perhaps) explain such behaviour. It was certainly not intended to imply a broader politi - cal or socio-political agenda. But let us conclude this lecture with a return to pure theory. Parsons did not  –  and this reflects his tremendous productivity, particularly in the 1950s – cling to his theoretical position as outlined here. rather, he worked on key aspects  of the edifice of what he himself called his ‘structural-functional’ theory. Some earlier developments came to an end, some theoretical constructs proved to be dead-ends, but in many respects he also radicalized the positions already developed in Toward a General Theory of Action  and The Social System . It is to  this further elaboration of his theory that we now turn.