43Charles Camic, ‘ Structure  after 50 years: The Anatomy of a Charter’ and Hans  Joas, The Creativity of Action , pp. 18ff. for comprehensive overviews). Some  of the criticisms were made immediately after the book appeared, but many  only after it had become very well known. As we pointed out in the previous lecture, Structure  was received rather slowly at first. over the course of time,  however, coming to terms with Parsons became increasingly central to others’ attempts to explain and contextualize their own equally ambitious theories, and inevitably criticisms became ever more systematic and comprehensive. In what follows, we shall present to you those criticisms that were of the greatest  significance to the development of theory ; in the second part of the lecture, we  examine whether and to what extent Parsons answered or perhaps even antici - pated these criticisms, as he attempted to refine his theoretical edifice. If we look first at the debate on the so-called  convergence thesis, it is appar - ent that it addressed a number of key problems; we examine these here. We can understand the sometimes passionate way in which scholars have grappled with this thesis only if we grasp that we are not dealing with a purely historio - graphical problem summed up by the question ‘Whose interpretation of the classical figures is (at least somewhat) better?’ Parsons claimed to have pro - duced a synthesis  of the work of these leading figures. now if it should prove  that Parsons’ attempt to reconstruct the history of sociology was blighted by major omissions or straightforward misinterpretations, this would cast ser - ious doubt on the plausibility of the main arguments in Structure . Above all,  his assertion that his work constituted a (legitimate) continuation of that of the classical figures would be untenable. We must therefore allow the criti - cisms of the convergence thesis some space here. 1. As well as claiming that Parsons had at times failed to appropriately inter - pret the four ‘classical figures’, critics specifically attacked his conver - gence thesis  for taking only Europeans and no Americans into account.  Indeed, this is peculiar in that sociology as a discipline found broad insti - tutional expression earlier in the USA than in Germany, France, the United  Kingdom or Italy. As far as the establishment of chairs of sociology and the publication of sociological journals is concerned, the USA was indubitably III The Structure of Social Action , which appeared in 1937, attracted a great deal  of criticism precisely because Parsons had such great ambitions for it (see 


44 the pioneer. yet American sociology was obviously quite insignificant for  Parsons and the thrust of his theoretical work. How are we to understand  this? In the last lecture we sang Parsons’ praises for putting European  social  scientists ‘on a pedestal’ with such vigour during the difficult years of the 1930s. And this we stand by unequivocally. y et at the same time, this had  the unfortunate consequence that he neglected other contexts in which sociology arose or included these in his arguments only in highly abbrevi - ated and thus somewhat distorted form. With regard to the intellectual his - tory of the USA, he appeared to suggest that  utilitarian,  individualist and/ or  evolutionist thinkers à la Herbert Spencer (1820–1902) had dominated  the landscape and that there was therefore no point looking for an instruct - ive critique  of utilitarian or similar theoretical constructs in America in  the first place. now the Englishman Herbert Spencer, whom Parsons dis - cusses in the first three pages of the first chapter of Structure , undoubtedly  had a significant influence and many admirers in the USA. But it is unfair to describe pre-1937 American intellectual history in its entirety as being under the sway of Spencer. It would be not merely unfair but quite simply wrong to apply such a description to American sociology , social psychology   and social philosophy  in particular, because many outstanding representa - tives of these disciplines such as George Herbert Mead, John Dewey, Charles Horton Cooley, William Isaac Thomas and robert Park (1864–1944) never  came close to embracing utilitarianism  or the work of Spencer. yet Parsons  fails to make a single mention of any of these authors, let alone discuss their highly innovative theory of action, which was indebted to the phil - osophy of American  pragmatism (see Lecture VI) and which might have  furnished him with important inspiration. Spencer’s thought was thus by no means representative of American sociology, as Parsons appears to sug - gest. rather, to quote r. Jackson Wilson’s pithy formulation ( In Quest of  Community , p. 155), Spencer was ‘more whipping boy than master’ in this  discipline and its neighbouring subjects. Parsons clearly took a different view and was only too ready to deny that American intellectual history had any relevance whatsoever to his own theoretical project. Later , Parsons was to fully own up to the deficiencies of his interpretation  in Structure  in this regard; but even then he conceded only that the  intern - alization of  values, addressed in the previous lecture, could have been dealt  with more effectively by drawing on American social psychology and soci - ology. But this was all he was willing to concede. Why, then, did Parsons stubbornly refuse to acknowledge significant aspects of American intel - lectual history? Was this a matter of genuine ignorance? or was the con - text in which Parsons acted perhaps characterized by veiled competition between Harvard University, where Parsons taught, and the University of Chicago, at which many of the pragmatist thinkers and sociologists we have mentioned had taught and where the influence of pragmatism could 


45 still be felt in 1937? We shall have something to say about this later on, when  we deal with the theoretical school of  ‘symbolic interactionism’, which was  indebted to American pragmatism , in one of the following lectures. This  will further clarify the exact significance of this deficit in Parsons’ conver - gence thesis. His failure to take such important issues into account may point to difficulties in his theory building. 2. Even his selection of European  thinkers inspired some protest. It was, for  example, striking that Parsons says almost nothing about Georg Simmel in Structure , although he later admitted, in the foreword to a new edition  of the book, for example, that he had originally intended to include a fairly lengthy chapter on Simmel and had in fact produced such a chapter in 1937. In this connection, he also acknowledges in self-critical fashion his neglect of American social psychology and sociology intimated above: Along with the American social psychologists, notably Cooley,  Mead and W. I. Thomas, the most important single figure neglected in the Structure of Social Action , and to an important degree in  my subsequent writings, is probably Simmel. It may be of inter - est that I actually drafted a chapter on Simmel for the Structure of  Social Action , but partly for reasons of space finally decided not  to include it. Simmel was more a micro- than a macrosociologist;  moreover, he was not, in my opinion, a theorist  on the same level  as the others.  (SSA, p. xiv) Parsons attributes his neglect of Simmel, that is, his decision not to examine his  work in detail in Structure , to lack of space or the lack of a clear theoretical orien - tation in Simmel’s oeuvre. Some will accept this. yet we might hesitate to do so,  particularly as concerns the latter assertion. In fact, Simmel produced a highly sophisticated theory. However, this was based not on the idea of action under - taken by discrete individuals, but on the idea of the relationship and interaction  between individuals . Simmel did not take individual  (utility-oriented) action as  his self-evident point of departure and then, like Marshall or Pareto for example, find himself confronted with the importance of  norms and ‘ultimate ends’.  rather, Simmel always worked on the basis that human beings start out as social  beings, that the young person is entwined in social contexts from birth onwards. In this sense, Simmel certainly acknowledged the significance of norms  and   values, but it would have been difficult to describe him as a ‘normal’ action theo - rist and the development of his work as converging on a  voluntaristic theory of  action. Including Simmel in Structure  would surely have disturbed the ‘plot’ of  Parsons’ ‘story’ quite substantially. Parsons himself conceded as much in 1979 in a letter to one of his admirers, the American sociologist Jeffrey Alexander, who we will discuss late in this lecture series. His failure to take Simmel into account may thus also point to a hidden theoretical problem.


46 3. Parsons’ way of dealing with the work of Karl Marx is also problematic;  while he chose not to devote a chapter specifically to him as he did to the other four classical European figures, he did at least discuss him at two different points in his book. But this discussion is far too short, above all because, interestingly enough, Parsons interprets Marx in a way which, in light of his own attempt to develop a voluntaristic theory of action  , makes  him appear a key figure. Parsons correctly interprets Marx as an author who, on the one hand, particularly while in exile in England, had placed himself clearly within the tradition of  utilitarianism through his increas - ing concern with issues of political economy. yet on the other hand, as a  result of his German background, Marx had also, at least partially, inter - nalized the edifice of idealistic thought characteristic of Hegel. If Parsons understood his own theory of action as a bridge between idealism and  posi- tivism or utilitarianism (SSA, p. 486), it would have made a lot of sense to examine in depth an author who fused the spirit of each. Marx may be considered to be understandable in terms of the logi - cal framework of English utilitarian thought, though … in a some - what different way from most other utilitarians . Here, however,  he tied his analysis into a theory of ‘dialectic’  evolution largely of  Hegelian origin. Marx thus forms an important bridge between  the positivistic and idealistic traditions of thought.  (ibid.) Even if Parsons correctly assumed that Marx’s work failed to successfully  integrate these theoretical elements, it would have been interesting, if not vital, particularly with respect to the thrust of his own theoretical work, to determine why this author, who had such an impact on the history of the world, proved incapable of producing a true synthesis. Why did Marx fail in this regard? Parsons leaves us in the dark. 4. Furthermore, there are good reasons to doubt the correctness of Parsons’ assumption that French intellectual life was dominated by positivism .  The French intellectual landscape was probably significantly more varied than Parsons acknowledged. It would otherwise be very difficult to explain why currents such as the philosophy of life ( Lebensphilosophie ) were able  to spread so rapidly in France towards the end of the nineteenth century and why German theoretical traditions were then willingly embraced in the second half of the twentieth century (see Lecture x IV). Parsons might  at least have drawn on the tradition of ‘moralism’ (see Johan Heilbron, The  Rise of Social Theory) so strong in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and on Alexis de Tocqueville, in order to find arguments much like those that crop up in Durkheim and which could have backed up the thrust of his own theoretical work, namely his emphasis on  values and  norms.


47 5. In the same way, Parsons’ assertion that German intellectual history was  moulded largely by ‘idealism’ is open to criticism; not so much because this statement is entirely wrong, but because by applying this label we all too easily run the risk of thoughtlessly overlooking strands of this history of much relevance to a theory of action. It is certainly true that certain phases of German intellectual history featured much talk of the Volksgeist   (‘national spirit’), the ‘German soul’, etc. Particularly during the First World War, German intellectuals fell over themselves to deploy such mar - tial terms, directed against the enemy, arguing as if every cultural phe - nomenon to be found in Germany directly embodied a ‘heroic spirit’. In this sense, Parsons’ characterization of the theoretical tradition prevailing in Germany as a kind of ‘emanationism’ was not entirely unfounded; this was a way of thinking that suggested that cultural and social phenomena are nothing other than the expression of supra-personal totalities such as the ‘spirit’ of a people or ‘age’. But the philosophy of German idealism also rested to a very significant degree on a conception of human action which would have made it possible to cast doubt, with good reason, on a key aspect of the Parsonian  ‘action frame of reference’. Johann Gottfried  Herder (1744–1803), for example, placed specific forms of action centre stage in his reflections, forms which Parsons’ conceptual apparatus fails to capture:  expressive  action, in which the individual expresses himself,  involves neither the pursuit of predetermined goals in rationalistic fashion (as  utilitarianism imagines) nor the gearing of oneself (of which Parsons  made so much) towards the common norms of a community or group. In a brilliant interpretation of this German ‘expressivist anthropology’, the great Canadian social philosopher Charles Taylor (b. 1931) has described this type of action as follows: If we think of our life as realizing an essence or form, this means  not just the embodying of this form in reality, it also means defin - ing in a determinate way what this form is. … the idea which a man  realizes is not wholly determinate beforehand; it is only made fully  determinate in being fulfilled. Hence the Herderian idea that my humanity is something unique, not equivalent to yours, and this unique quality can only be revealed in my life itself. ‘Each man has his own measure, as it were an accord peculiar to him of all  his feelings to each other.’ [Herder] The idea is not just that men  are different; this was hardly new; it was rather that the differences define the unique form that each of us is called on to realize. The differences take on moral import; so that the question could arise for the first time whether a given form of life was an authentic  expression of certain individuals or people.  (Taylor, Hegel , pp. 16f.)


48 Two important points must be made about this quote from Charles Taylor  (on what follows, you are referred in particular to Joas, The Creativity of  Action , pp. 75ff.). First, Herder and the other thinkers within this tradition  of expressivist anthropology understand action not as rationally planned, guided by given goals, conceptions of utility, etc., but as a phenomenon in which the meaning of the action for the actor emerges only in the act itself. Second, this action is not guided by a social  norm. It comes, as it were, from  within; it is more than mere compliance with norms. If you are wonder - ing what everyday examples of such expressive action might be, we would initially suggest that you think of drawing a picture, singing a tune, the aes - thetic production of the self through decoration of the body, types of move - ment such as dance, etc. you will surely concede that when you dance you  do not, as a rule, wish (or at least not only) to pursue a predetermined goal; nor are you merely submitting to a norm. But Herder by no means wished to restrict this conception of action as actors’ self-expression to aesthetic forms. repelled by the high-handedness of self-proclaimed ‘geniuses’, he  emphasized ever more vigorously that self-realization by means of action can also occur through acts of helping, the establishment of peace, etc. Herder’s non-rationalist and non-normativist conception of action may  sound strange at first. But in fact you will be quite familiar with situations, particularly from everyday life, in which you have begun to take action not because you were driven by irrational urges, but because you had the feel - ing that the action itself was more important to you than all the goals or ‘ends’ which it might accomplish: expression of the ego, and not so much the goal of the action or compliance with norms , was the top priority.  We shall elaborate on phenomena and problems of this kind in the lec - ture on  neo-pragmatism, but first we want to make it clear that this model  of expressive action can hardly be captured by Parsons’  ‘action frame of  reference’, which is thus indubitably deficient. The fact that Parsons failed to notice this is connected, among other things, with the specific form of his  convergence thesis and its rash dismissal of entire national intellectual  traditions. He failed to appreciate that the notion of the ‘expression’ of a ‘national spirit’ was ultimately anchored in an expressive model of action. While his criticism of ‘emanationism’ was quite correct, he was wrong to ignore this model. To sum up, we can criticize Parsons’ convergence thesis for implying a relatively unilinear notion of historical progress. At least, Parsons sees no contradiction between his preference for Pareto rather than Marshall, so clearly expressed in Structure  (Parsons holds Pareto in such high regard in part because the lat - ter did not share the optimism about progress typical of the Victorian era),  or between his critique of  evolutionist constructions of history à la Spencer  and his own interpretation of intellectual history with its implicit belief in 


49 progress. And his interpretation certainly does entail such a belief, implying as  it does that a clearly discernible, ascending path leads from the classical figures of sociology all the way to Parsons himself (the term ‘convergence’, of course, incorporates this notion). n ow it may well be that Parsons’ theoretical frame - work is superior to that of the classical figures. But this is not what matters to us here. rather, we wish to warn against writing intellectual history very  generally  from the perspective of the ‘victors’, that is, the victorious theoretical  constructions. For as we have just seen in the example of German expressivist anthropology around Herder, there were, are and always will be theoretical approaches which have something to tell future generations, even if ‘progress’ initially ignores these approaches by and large. We can often learn much of significance from them. The notion that ‘progress’ in the humanities would enable us to ‘capture’ the entire  experiential content of human life and action  valid in the past and then grasp it theoretically seems very strange to us, or at the very least over-confident. Sociologists, and not just historians, are thus well advised to take a look back through intellectual history. There is always something new to be discovered there. Contemporary German sociologists may spend a little too much of their time interpreting the classical figures and exploring the history of their own discipline. But such activities are in them - selves entirely legitimate and indeed imperative, insofar as they involve draw - ing on old, forgotten, intellectual resources, which are always ‘new’, in order to enhance current theories and resolve theoretical problems. So much for what we believe to be the really weighty objections to the form  and content of Parsons’ convergence thesis  . other criticisms seem to us less  significant, if not quite misplaced. But since some of these crop up again and again, we need to take at least a brief look at them. We addressed Parsons’ extremely broad and sweeping use of the term  utili- tarianism in the previous lecture. But the claim that Parsons misrepresented utilitarianism and ignored some or even the most important of its moral phil - osophical and social theoretical arguments seems to be missing the point. For those who advocate an ‘appropriate’ interpretation of utilitarianism are often faced with the difficulty of delimiting this theoretical school with any preci - sion, and in some cases one is entitled to ask whether all the moral philosophi - cal arguments which they mention are really utilitarian  in nature or whether  the authors who supposedly document the breadth and diversity of utilitarian thought were truly utilitarians. Parsons merely asserted that much of modern  Anglo-Saxon philosophy and classical political economy is imbued with utili - tarian arguments. But this does not mean that every author working in this tradition was a true-blue utilitarian or that every author described as a utili - tarian formulated nothing but unambiguously utilitarian arguments. Thus, it is not completely convincing to criticize Parsons’ thesis (see for example the criticisms put forward by Charles Camic in ‘The Utilitarians revisited’) by  quoting, for example, from the work of Adam Smith or others and showing 


50 that it features highly sophisticated moral philosophical arguments that go far  beyond Bentham’s ‘greatest happiness principle’. Parsons would have accepted this without hesitation. His line of argument centred on the logic and fate - ful theoretical consequences of a model of action narrowly focused on utility (that is, utilitarian) , and not primarily on achieving a historically adequate  definition or classification of authors. His aim was not to portray the history of British thought in all its complexities; he was concerned first and foremost with economics, which consistently took its lead from the  utility-oriented  model of action only from the mid-nineteenth century on. Further, Parsons is criticized for seeing convergence where there was in fact  divergence. Some critics (see Pope, Cohen and Hazelrigg, ‘ on the Divergence  of Weber and Durkheim: A Critique of Parsons’ Convergence Thesis’) have claimed that the arguments and topics found in the work of Durkheim and Weber in particular drifted ever further apart and that for this reason alone Pa r s on s’ c l a i m of  c onvergenc e i s a bsu rd . For t hem, t he re a l t he si s to b e defende d  is one of divergence. But this too is a misunderstanding. Parsons was not con - cerned to show that the work of the four authors he considered converged in all respects, but that they converged on a particular point, namely with respect to the development and elaboration of a  voluntaristic theory of action, that is,  with respect to the synchronous treatment of the basic sociological problems of action and  social order. We can now leave the debate on the convergence thesis  behind us. We turn  to the dispute over Parsons’  ‘action frame of reference’, that is, the criticisms  made of his conception of action. Here again, a number of significant objec - tions must be mentioned. 1. you have already encountered the first criticism in our discussion of  Herder’s  ‘expressive action’. We shall therefore do no more than briefly  ask again whether every instance of action can truly be crammed into  the  means–ends schema, whether there is not a type of action beyond the  attainment of goals and fulfilment of  norms. As our brief discussion of  Herder showed,  religious rituals, art, etc. resist such categorization (see  Hans Joas, The Creativity of Action ). But even on the ‘opposite’ side of the  spectrum of action, if you will, there are activities which the  means–ends  schema fails to capture. Think of entirely routinized actions, actions which you carry out preconsciously, without really thinking. you will notice that  a large number of everyday actions proceed in exactly this way: preparing breakfast for example, assuming that you do this often and not just once a year, does not involve a chain of clear goals in light of the given means, and reference to norms and  values gets us no further here either. The actions  you carry out in the kitchen (fetching the butter from the fridge, making the coffee, setting the table, etc.) certainly do not occur as an uninterrupted series of calculated acts. This may have been the case when you prepared 


51 breakfast for your parents for the first time as a child and had to have a good  think about whether breakfast really involves butter, coffee and a set table. you then had to make all these things happen by thinking them through  and carrying out a series of individual actions. nowadays when you make  your usual breakfast the earlier process of goal-setting has long since been ‘absorbed’; you no longer think about it. This is routinized action, in which these earlier goals are directly incorporated in the carrying out of the action; you do not reflect on what exactly you are doing or which goals you wish to attain. We shall return to all of this again in Lecture xII on the English  social theorist Anthony Giddens, who recognizes that the Parsonian frame of action features certain deficiencies in this regard. 2. Parsons’ ‘action frame of reference’  was also criticized for its ‘objectivist’  leanings. on this view, Parsons did not really take the cognitive capaci - ties and weaknesses of actors into account with respect to how they deal with the  action situation. Parsons’ work creates the impression that it is  quite clear that the actors see the means and conditions of action as they are – that is, objectively. But what actors know about the circumstances of their actions may vary a great deal; this cannot simply be determined externally – objectively – but rather the social scientist must first examine how the actors subjectively see things before making reliable statements about how they will act under given circumstances (see Warner, ‘Toward a redefinition of Action Theory’). A similar argument can be made about  the norms and values of a society: these are not simply present or given, but must always be interpreted  by the actors. We must get to the bottom of  this feat of interpretation if we wish to understand the action undertaken; merely referring to ‘objectively’ existing norms  and values  fails to take us  any further. All these points, however, only came to play a central role in the debate on theory within sociology later on, as you will find out in the lectures on  symbolic interactionism,  ethnomethodology and on the work  of Anthony Giddens. 3. Closely bound up with the last point is the critical question of why Parsons, in his account of the ‘unit act’, scrutinizes the prerequisites for all action by referring to the  situation of action, but ignored its  consequences . Parsons  writes as though this action is over and done with once its goal has been achieved. But this is a mode of analysis that regards the individual act in near-total isolation. This ignores the fact that the consequences of the action often have an immediate effect upon the actor. ordered configura - tions are formed not only through the individual action of various  actors;  my own  actions also form an interlocking chain, because the action I take  has consequences to which I then have to respond. It would thus have been a very good idea to examine these consequences in more depth, especially as Parsons described and discussed Pareto’s attempts to come to terms with the problem of side-effects in detail in Structure . yet strangely enough, he 


52 failed to draw on Pareto’s insights in formulating his own  action frame of  reference. Among other things, the key distinction between the ‘intended’  and ‘unintended consequences’ of action, those I wished to produce and those I triggered without meaning to, was introduced only later by those close to Parsons, such as the American sociologist robert Merton (1910– 2003). But even this step is probably insufficient, because within the cat - egory of unintended consequences we still have to distinguish between those which are anticipated and those to which this does not apply. My actions may have consequences that are unintended, which I do not in fact wish to bring about – and I am quite aware of this. I will nonetheless act as planned, because achieving the intended consequences of my action seems more important to me than the unpleasant side-effects. Thus, in such cases I include these side-effects in my calculations, as I have foreseen them. But of course not all unintended consequences can be anticipated; those which can may in fact be a rarity. Social life is so complex that a single action often has tremendous consequences, which were literally impossible to pre - dict when the action was taken. We need only think of the assassination in Sarajevo in 1914, when the murder of the heir to the Austrian throne involved consequences of which the assassins were surely unaware, because no one – not even they themselves – could have imagined that this would trigger the carnage of the First World War (see the illuminating remarks in Anthony Giddens, The Constitution of Society , pp. 10–14). 4. With respect to the consequences of action , the question arises as to what  extent it makes any sense at all to take the action of the individual, an iso - lated action, as our point of departure. Does not Parsons’ account of the ‘unit act’ warp our perspective by assuming that the actor generates his action more or less autonomously, off his own bat? Is it not in fact necessary to come at this problem from a quite different angle, one which we touched on briefly in relation to the neglect of the tradition of American theory and Simmel in Structure  so often subject to criticism? Simmel’s point of depar - ture was not the individual actor, but rather the social relation , as he took  the plausible view that it is the original sociality of the human being which makes action possible in the first place. The human being does not come into the world as an actor, but as a helpless baby or child, embedded in a social structure, who gains the capacity for action from this structure . on  this view, sociality precedes the capacity for action, problematizing every attempt to make the isolated actor the central focus of theory building. The American  pragmatists, particularly George Herbert Mead, have argued  in much the same way, though bringing out the social psychological and action theoretical aspects with far greater sophistication and precision. But Parsons, as we have seen, leaves Mead out of the equation in his reconstruc - tion of sociological thought as well. you will learn a good deal more about  this in the lecture on  symbolic interactionism.