53 5. Parsons’  action frame of reference was also criticized for the obscurity of  what we might call the ‘normative’. In Structure , Parsons spoke of  norms  and  values, and with respect to the latter also of ‘ultimate ends’, without  truly making clear whether and how norms  and values differ and how  exactly they are connected. When he spoke of ‘ultimate ends’, he did indeed  differentiate between personal ‘ultimate ends’ and those which may be characteristic of an entire society, but he failed to ask whether and how the two relate to one another. Ironically, one may criticize Parsons in much the same way as he himself did the  utilitarians. Parsons asserted that the utili - tarians had failed to inquire into the origins of notions of utility, desires, ‘ends’, etc. In a similar way, we must criticize Parsons for failing to make any effort to inquire into the  genesis of values, where they come from, despite  the fact that they are so central to his  voluntaristic theory of action and  that no term seems to be more important to his theory than ‘values’. When one reads Structure  (as well as Parsons’ subsequent writings), one gains the  impression that values are simply given. But how are we to conceive of the process by which something becomes a value as such for an individual? And how do values come to be shared  in the first place? Parsons is silent on  this, and we are forced to look for answers elsewhere (for an examination of the core features of this issue, see Joas, The Genesis of Values ). you will hear  about this in greater depth in the lectures on French sociology, particularly on Alain Touraine and those on  neo-pragmatism. 6. The final criticism is on a rather different level than those above in that Parsons himself noticed a deficit in his theory, which he was quick to acknowledge. The Structure of Social Action fails to explore what drives  human action. one may have certain goals and values, and even the means  necessary to realize them, without in fact bringing oneself to accomplish them. Where, then, does the will, the exertion, the energy necessary to act come from? noticing this lacuna, Parsons himself speaks of ‘effort’, of  the dynamic force that takes aims and ends beyond their initial state as mere cognitions and enables them to become realities . He himself saw that  more work was needed here. It is vital that you keep in mind these six criticisms of the Parsonian  action frame  of reference  for two reasons. First, Structure  was of course not Parsons’ final  work, but his first. The question thus arises as to whether Parsons himself recog - nized these criticisms and worked out a response to them. This is of considerable significance to how we assess his later work. Second, as we hinted in our identi - fication of numerous theoretical schools and theorists as we moved through the six points above, and as will soon be apparent in the way we have structured this lecture, many subsequent sociologists worked assiduously on Parsons’ action frame of reference. The development of modern sociological theory can essen - tially be presented as an argument with the edifice of Parsonian thought.


54 We have now arrived at the second part of the lecture, where we leave  Structure  behind us at last and concentrate on Parsons’ subsequent works. In  terms of the evolution of his work, it is apparent that Parsons did in fact fur - ther refine his action frame of reference in one respect. As mentioned already,  he fully recognized that he had neglected the true motive for action, that is,  he had failed to sufficiently analyse which energies propel human beings to realize goals and values . It is at this point that Parsons began to take an in- depth look at psychoanalysis. He even submitted to a training analysis and drew on other, related psychological theories of the time in order to explain which motivating factors are anchored in the personality of the very young child, influencing her for the rest of her life. This intensive engagement with psychoanalysis finds clear expression in his writings, as he took up the criti - cisms of the original action frame of reference  set out in point 6 above, putting  them to productive use. In the immediate post-1937 period, however, he was initially focused on other topics and tasks, which, at first sight at least, are fun - damentally empirical rather than theoretical. First of all, Parsons began to develop an interest in the  medical profes - sion, studying the behaviour of medical students at Harvard Medical School for more than a year. Doctors, along with lawyers, etc. are among the rep - resentatives of the ‘professions’, which, while their tradition dates back to pre-capitalist relations, have lost none of their significance in modern  (capi - talist) society. o n the contrar y, the number of doctors and law yers has grown  steadily, and other professions structured in a similar way have also gained in importance. This is remarkable because while professionals such as doc - tors are paid according to market principles in a capitalist society, the ego - tistical market principle is at the same time subject to clear restrictions by the ethics firmly anchored in this professional group. In line with these, the doctor must see himself as the servant and helper of his patients, as one who certainly may not do or demand anything he likes in order to advance his immediate market or financial self-interest. The doctor must, for example, help patients even if desperate circumstances mean they are unable to pay; he may not undertake nonsensical medical interventions, even if a patient has requested them and is willing to pay for them, etc. For Parsons, the nature of the professions is so significant because it demonstrates that capitalism  does  not in fact follow an inexorable logic of its own, in which the principles of personal utility are all that count and all other elements are gradually eradi - cated. r ather, according to Parsons, the existence of the professions reveals  that ethical systems can assert themselves while surrounded by the logic of the market; thus, not every non-market phenomenon – as Marx and Engels predicted in their Communist Manifesto and contemporary  opponents and  supporters of  globalization continue to assert – ‘melts into air’. As you can  see, Parsons’ empirical studies also have a theoretical tenor. If you would like to know more about this, you can do no better than to read Parsons’ 


55 essay entitled ‘The Professions   and Social Structure’ from 1939 (in T alcott  Parsons, Essays in Sociological Theory ). The other key focus of Parsons’ investigations in the late 1930s and early  1940s, which were of a more empirical nature, lay in the field of political ana - lysis. Parsons, like many other American social scientists, was employed by  the US government to help plan for the war and for the post-war period, sim - ply because it needed to know about the society of the enemy, the problems  affecting it, the prospects for  democratic reconstruction, etc. Parsons there - fore wrote essays and memoranda, some of them brilliant, on German soci - ety in the immediate pre-1933 period and under national Socialism. Here,  he analysed the conditions in which Hitler rose to power and asked, among  other things, whether there was a risk of an ‘American Hitler’ emerging in the  USA. As classified documents, many of these essays were not published at the  time. Today, you can of course read his work on national Socialism without  problem. We recommend the anthology by Uta Gerhardt ( Talcott Parsons on  National Socialism , 1993) or – if you would prefer a brief review – the 1942  essay entitled ‘Democracy   and Social Structure in Pre- nazi Germany’ (in  Talcott Parsons, Essays in Sociological Theory ). While Parsons’ assessments  have been superseded by the findings of contemporary historians in many  respects and require relativization, his analyses were for the most part streets  ahead of those of other American sociologists of the day. Given the nature of our account so far, one might suspect that the focus of  Parsons’ work increasingly shifted to empirical problems from 1937 on or –  witness his engagement with Freud and psychoanalysis – that he carried out  further work on his  action frame of reference, trying to remedy its evident  weaknesses as identified above. But this was not the case. rather, at almost the same time as he was engaged in the writing of Structure ,  Parsons began – as we know only on the basis of manuscripts published much  later (see ‘Actor, Situation and normative Patterns’, 1939) – to think about a  comprehensive  theory of social order . Parsons thus considered the action frame  of reference   that he had developed largely complete and adequate. His prior - ity now was clearly to produce a theory capable of grasping and explaining  different forms of empirical order. As you know from our exposition on The  Structure of Social Action , Parsons’ point of departure here was the observa - tion that social order exists and that therefore the  utilitarian concept of action  is wrong or at least too narrow. He then developed his own  ‘voluntaristic’ con - cept of action, which was intended to render comprehensible the unquestion - able fact of social order. This order as such was not really his chief concern; he  had not explicitly theorized it at all at that point. He now wished to make up  for this. To get straight to the point: Parsons moved towards a theory of order,  to which the literature on Parsons affixed the well-chosen label of  ‘normativist  functionalism’ and which can be seen in fully developed form in his second  major work, The Social System , from 1951. Since this label will mean little to 


56 you, we shall begin by explaining the term  ‘functionalism’ to help you under - stand the thrust of Parsons’ theory of order . ‘Functionalism’ is a way of thinking that describes and explains social phe - nomena by pointing to the functions that they fulfil within a greater whole. one  can show, for example, what (functional) contribution the family makes to soci - ety as a whole. one might spontaneously think of contributions such as the rais - ing of young people, motivating them with respect to their future  working lives,  a task of tremendous societal importance, or the equally significant imparting of  social norms by the parents, etc. one might then claim that the family emerged  because it enabled functions important to the social whole to be fulfilled. This mode of argumentation, briefly outlined here through a first example, has a very long history and cropped up repeatedly in various systems of thought and disciplines over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Who or what most influenced Parsons with respect to his adoption of functionalist concepts is hard to determine. Perhaps his contact with Bronislaw Malinowski at the London School of Economics in the mid-1920s was decisive; it was after all Malinowski (1884–1942) who did so much to advance functional analysis within anthropology. Perhaps it was his initial study of biology which made Parsons aware, for example, of the functions  of organs within the body as a whole  and their importance to its survival within a given environment. Perhaps, and this we intend as something of a provocation, his reading of Marx also played a key role, as there are functionalist arguments to be found here too. For our pur - poses, the question of what influenced Parsons is ultimately of no great import - ance. We wish instead to present a striking example of a functionalist argument from a Marxian theoretical context, in order to lay bare for you the specific logic of functionalist thought, its peculiarities and the difficulties it entails, and to help you understand that functionalism is relevant not only in those cases where authors explicitly mention it. In his analyses of  capitalism, among other things, Marx repeatedly drew  at tent ion to t he ex istence of t he so-c a l led ‘ i ndu st r ia l reser ve a r my ’ of t he u nem - ployed, which was in his opinion a typical feature of capitalism. This reserve army, he asserted, was extremely useful to the capitalists, because it reduces the prospects of workers with jobs achieving wage increases. The workers have no real means of applying pressure: in the case of a strike, for example, there exists a large number of people willing to work, and who would be happy to do so for a lower wage. Striking could thus never have much impact. one can  claim, therefore, that the army of the unemployed fulfils a function vital to the structure and dynamics of capitalism, because it enables the capitalists to produce cheaply and exploit the workers. But Marx goes further still, claiming at certain points in his work that the unemployed exist  because  they ultimately  serve the interests of capital or capitalism, because they are functional for the capitalist system. He thus argues that capitalism creates the unemployed in the first place.


57 All of this looks plausible at first sight, but once you begin to think about  it you will soon notice that it may be problematic to make both claims at the  same time. If one does so – as is typical of many functionalist arguments – the  causes and the consequences of a phenomenon are conflated in peculiar fash - ion. In the first claim, unemployment is in principle the prerequisite for  or (one  of the) causes of the sound functioning of the capitalist system. In the second claim, meanwhile, unemployment is the consequence  of the functioning of  capitalism. Logically speaking, this is highly problematic, as the consequences or effects of a phenomenon can be seen only at a later point, while its prereq - uisites and causes must of course exist before it does. Functionalist arguments like the one above used by Marx must thus be taken with a large pinch of salt given their conflation of cause and effect, that is, their tendency to treat effects as causes. Above all, it is important to grasp that identifying the functions of a phenomenon is not generally sufficient to explain  it. A simple example will  suffice to show this. Animals may fulfil important functions for a family and especially for children within a family: one learns to behave responsibly by looking after them, one gains access to the natural world, etc. But by no means does this imply that all families necessarily keep pets, and it would be utterly absurd to claim that canaries or tortoises evolved because  they must fulfil this  function for the family. This example shows that while it is easy to ‘identify’ the functions performed by various phenomena, by no means does this neces - sarily tell us anything about what causes them. It is vital to be alert to the risk of simply equating functional claims with explanations. As you will see, however, the social sciences and particularly sociology are  brimming over with functionalist assertions or explanations. Such assertions appear in various contexts, among authors of both the left and right, among  Marxists and non-Marxists. The use of the term ‘function’ has become noth - ing less than inflationary. Those using it generally fail either to clarify what exactly a phenomenon contributes  to the greater whole, or to explain whether  or how making a functionalist assertion equates or may equate with explain - ing something. It thus comes as no surprise that sociology all too often features  what you might call a ‘functionalist prejudice’. This refers to the assumption that whatever is happening at a given moment is always necessary to, that is, functional for, the survival of a greater whole. If the unemployment figures rise, then on this view this is undoubtedly functionally necessary to ‘capital’, especially because, as we have seen, it diminishes the workers’ capacity to take industrial action and wages can be driven down; if the number of those unemployed falls meanwhile, adherents of this perspective state that this too merely shows how effectively capital can use and exploit the  labour force and  how functional the falling unemployment figures and the parallel increase in the number of jobs therefore is. The arbitrary nature of such arguments is thus given free rein; there is no way they can be said to provide genuine explanations. We shall return to this point in the lecture on Anthony Giddens, 


58 certainly one of the sharpest and cleverest critics of functionalism within the  discipline of sociology, who has gone so far as to suggest that sociology would be better off doing without the concept of function for a few decades, rather than deploying it in this imprecise way. Does this then mean that functionalist arguments as such are meaningless  or wrong? no, not always. First, such arguments may in fact play a heuristic  role in the research process, that is, they may help us gain purchase on reality. It is certainly true that references to functional relations in the social scientific literature are seldom linked with evidence that these relations do in fact exist. In this sense, a functionalist argument is initially no more than a plausible assumption. But assumptions can be subjected to empirical investigation. In other words, functionalist arguments may provide us with hypotheses open to  falsification. Though a functionalist argument is not an explanation, it may  point the way to one. Second, the conflation of cause and effect so typical of functionalism is permissible only if actual processes of feedback  can be shown.  That is, Marx’s statement that the unemployed exist because  they ultimately  serve the interests of capital or capitalism and are thus functional is correct if he can show not only that an army of unemployed is useful for capitalists, but also that within capitalism specific actors – such as capitalists   – pursue strat - egies which produce a certain reservoir of unemployed workers or which at least stabilize such a tendency. To put it in more abstract terms, one must show the consequences of a specific phenomenon and how these in turn have a spe - cific effect – in the sense of a feedback mechanism – on the phenomenon, that is, that they also cause it. These feedback effects may be simple or dynamic in nature. Body tempera- ture is an example of the latter. The human body has a very specific tempera - ture, which is maintained via energy supply, body hair, movement, etc. Should the body temperature rise through an excess of movement, this is counter - acted by the formation of (cooling) sweat; once the period of movement is over, this may result in an excessive fall in body temperature; the body may begin to cool, causing the hairs to rise in order to warm it up again, and the body may need to be supplied with energy through food, etc. What we are deal - ing with here is a dynamic, constantly changing equilibrium; one can observe concrete feedback processes  which allow us to use functionalist language in rel - atively unproblematic fashion. The question of course is whether functionalist arguments can be deployed in such a straightforward way in all contexts and disciplines. In any event, our excursus on functionalism was intended to show that this  theoretical construct may  rapidly lead to questionable conclusions, particu - larly in the social sciences. Parsons makes use of such functionalism to con - struct a theory of  social order, and we will be asking whether he managed to  avoid its many pitfalls and problems. But before we do so, we need to make a final point directly connected with this issue. We have already established that 


59 every  theory of action refers to a theory of order, that a theory of action requires  a theory of order. From 1937 onwards, Parsons vigorously set about concep - tualizing such a theory. But functionalism (especially Parsons’  ‘normativist  functionalism’) is just one example of such a theory of order; it is not the theory  of order. What we are getting at here is that Parsons’ theory of action does not  ineluctably  cause him to adopt functionalist ideas. yet, while deploying the   concept of system, Parsons makes straight for such a functionalism, drawing  on ideas from biology, as is apparent in the 1939 paper ‘Actor, Situation and normative Patterns’ mentioned above: In some sense a  social system tends to ‘stable equilibrium’, to the main - tenance of itself as a ‘going concern’, as a system, and the maintenance of  a structural pattern either stably or through a course of development. In  t his respect it is a na logous ( not ident ica l) to t he orga nism a nd its tendenc y  to maintain from a short-time point of view, a physiological equilibrium  or ‘homeostasis’ and from a longer-run point of view, the maintenance of the curve of the life cycle.  (p. 103; original emphasis) We shall clarify what exactly Parsons means by a ‘social system’  in a moment,  with respect to our analysis of Toward a General Theory of Action and The  Social System , two books from 1951 in which his thoughts on functionalism  appeared in their most mature form so far. But first we must shed light on what  it means to call his functionalism  normativist . This is in fact relatively straight - forward, as you have already learned a good deal about Parsons’ early work and about how tremendously important  norms and  values were to him. Parsons’  functionalism differs from other functionalisms in that it attributes central importance to values and norms both as regards the actions undertaken by  individuals and the stability of the social order. In fact, examining every social phenomenon in terms of how it functions to maintain and transmit norms and  values  became Parsons’ core intellectual project. n orms   and values   thus con - stitute the point of departure for Parsons’ functionalism, the ultimate point of analytical reference; this applies, of course, neither to biologists, for whom an organism’s survival within a given environment represents this ultimate reference point, nor to other social scientific functionalists, nor even to Marx, who might be referred to as a ‘materialist functionalist’ . The term  normativ - ist functionalism is thus a fitting one, despite the fact that Parsons does not  use the term in this way, speaking instead of a ‘structural-functional’ form of analysis (see The Social System , p. vii). As you will have gathered from the above quotation, Parsons uses the  con- cept of system to construct his theory of order. He refers to a  ‘social system’,  which in itself indicates that he is aware of other  systems. But let us take one  thing at a time. our first priority is to clarify what Parsons means by ‘system’  in the first place. In order to do so, it is helpful to delineate precisely those of 


60 his ideas which he developed in greatest depth in Toward a General Theory of  Action , a co-authored volume. As the name Toward a General Theory of Action itself implies, in fleshing  out his theory of order, Parsons ’ point of departure is action theory, that is,  his  ‘action frame of reference’, with which you are familiar from the previ - ous lecture and which Parsons modified to a very minor degree. Though his  terminology sounds different, Parsons has maintained his action theoretical stance: the actor always acts within a specific  situation, that is, she relates to  specific objects, to non-social (physical) as well as social objects, in the latter case therefore to other individuals (the actor may even thematize herself as an individual) or to collectivities or groups. In the process of taking action, the actor selects who or what she wishes to focus on, who or what she is geared  towards . What an actor gears herself towards when taking action thus depends  on a process of selection, and if these action orientations cluster, if regularities develop, Parsons talks of a  ‘system of action’: The word system  is used in the sense that determinate relations of inter - dependence exist within the complex of empirical phenomena. The  antithesis of the concept of system is random variability. However, no  implication of rigidity is intended.  (Toward a General Theory of Action , p. 5, fn. 5) Parsons’ overriding concern in Structure  was to investigate how the actions of  a number of actors can link up, his aim being to resolve the  utilitarian prob - lem of the ‘randomness of ends’. Parsons now goes one step further by asking  how stable, regular action orientations can come about in the first place  within  a single actor . And this is also a ‘response’ to the criticism mentioned above  that his action frame of reference  lacks a motivational element, that he fails  to clarify in Structure  what actually drives the actor. Parsons makes use of his  more intensive engagement with psychology and psychoanalysis, which began in the post-1937 period. He describes how stable cognitive  and emotional or  cathectic  action orientations develop within the individual actor through past  learning processes and particularly early childhood experiences, in which the sexual aspects of the parent–child relationship emphasized by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) play a role. Parsons thus tried to capture the emotional forms of attachment to objects through the term ‘cathexis’ – the Freudian concept of libidinal attachment. Cognitive and cathectic orientations are then integrated   by means of evaluative , that is, value-related orientations. The tendency of the organism toward integration requires the assessment and  comparison of immediate cognized objects and cathectic interests in terms of their remoter consequences for the larger unit of evaluation. Evaluation  rests on standards which may be either cognitive standards of truthfulness,  appreciative standards of appropriateness, or moral standards of rightness.  (General Theory , p. 5)


61 We can perhaps put it more simply and say that both cognitive and cathectic  and ultimately – overarching both these – evaluative motivations enter into every action and that all of this explains the ‘effort’ and the will that stimulate the actor to take action. This framework makes sense of the fact that Parsons understands the per - son as a ‘system of action’, for it is in the person himself that stable  action  orientations cluster in that mutual interlacing of cognition, cathexis and eval - uation – on the basis of the experiences and learning processes that we have already addressed. The action undertaken by the individual is thus not ran - dom; his action orientations form a pattern. This is why Parsons refers here to a  ‘personality system’: the actions carried out by the individual exhibit a certain  consistency as a result of past experiences. This system will be called the personality, and we will define it as the  organized system of the orientation and motivation of action of one indi - vidual actor.  (ibid., p. 7) But of course action orientations are not only bundled within the individual ,  but also between individuals  – as we already know from the analysis provided  in Structure . Because there are  norms and  values, stable action orientations  and expectations develop, which also provide a basis for the orderly linkage of  the actions taken by a number of actors . Parsons calls this the  ‘social system’: The social system is … made up of the relationships of individuals, but it  is a system which is organized around the problems inherent in or aris - ing from social interaction of a plurality of individual actors rather than  around the problems which arise in connection with the integration of  the actions of an individual actor.  (ibid.) But the ‘personality system’ and ‘social system’ are phenomena that cannot  really be separated empirically; they are not spheres of reality in their own right. rather, as the philosophy of science puts it, this mode of  expression clearly  involves an analytical  distinction: in line with my interests as a researcher, I  may pay more attention to the ‘personality system’ or to the ‘social system’. For  the actor is of course on the one hand an individual. But on the other hand he is embedded in contexts of interaction with other actors through one  portion  of his personality, and I am not, therefore, dealing with two truly separate  ‘objects’ or ‘phenomena’ here. Parsons now distinguishes still another system from these two systems,  but one which he does not understand as an action  system at this point in his  development. This is the  ‘cultural system’, by which he means the orderly link - age of cultural  symbolizations. Here, he touches on the question of how ideas  or belief systems are linked, how expressive symbols, styles or trends in art 


62 form a reasonably homogeneous unity or how the values of a society come to  exhibit a degree of coherence: systems of culture have their own forms and problems of integration  which are not reducible to those of either personality or social systems or both together. The cultural tradition in its significance both as an  object of orientation and as an element in the orientation of action must  be articulated both conceptually and empirically with personalities and social systems. Apart from embodiment in the orientation systems of concrete actors, culture, though existing as a body of artefacts and as sys - tems of symbols, is not in itself organized as a system of action. (ibid.) It will come as no surprise to you to learn that this system takes on much import - ance within Parsonian theory in as much as it touches on those values and norms  which Parsons had already declared central to the  coordination of actions in  Structure . In fact, Parsons believes that the values from the cultural system must  be anchored in the two action systems, through two processes: through  intern - alization  within the personality system and through  institutionalization  in the  social system. As we shall be taking a more detailed look at institutionalization   further below (p. 65), we shall restrict ourselves here to a few brief remarks on internalization, which we have touched on briefly already. Parsons tried to make good at least one weakness in the original  action  frame of reference by paying greater attention to the motives  of action, distin - guishing between cognitive, cathectic and evaluative motives. The notion of cathexis referred to attachment to objects or the rejection of certain objects, and here, drawing on elements of Freudian theory, Parsons emphasized the role of sexuality and showed how biological urges are transformed into  specific fantasies and then into motives of action. These human drive energies  become interwoven with cultural values. It is the process of ‘socialization’ that facilitates the linkage or merging of cathectic and evaluative/value-laden motives, because the parents, for example, impart values, symbols and belief systems and the long-term absorption and adoption of these values, symbols  ,  etc. occurs via diverted drive energies from the realm of infant sexuality. The drives are thus fused with values through socialization, rendering them socially tolerable. The child ‘internalizes’ the norms  and values  of  the society. S o  mu c h  f o r  t h e  k e y  r o l e  p l ay e d  b y  t h e  c u l t u r a l  s y s t e m  i n  p r o c e s s e s  o f  i nt e r n a l - ization  . It can be realized only as part of an action system. ‘Personality  system’,  ‘social system’ and ‘cultural system’ are merely analytical distinctions. Looking at the steps in Parsons’ argument described so far, it is apparent that  he has largely retained the action frame of reference , which has been expanded  to some extent with reference to the cognitive, cathectic and evaluative motiv - ations  of action: what is really new is his bringing the concept of system into 